Proceedings of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th IJCNLP of the AFNLP, pages 199–207,
Suntec, Singapore, 2-7 August 2009. c
2009 ACL and AFNLP
Summarizing Definition from Wikipedia
Shiren Ye and Tat-Seng Chua and Jie Lu
Lab of Media Search
National University of Singapore
{yesr|chuats|luj}@comp.nus.edu.sg
Abstract
Wikipedia provides a wealth of knowl-
edge, where the first sentence, infobox
(and relevant sentences), and even the en-
tire document of a wiki article could be
considered as diverse versions of sum-
maries (definitions) of the target topic.
We explore how to generate a series of
summaries with various lengths based on
them. To obtain more reliable associations
between sentences, we introduce wiki con-
cepts according to the internal links in
Wikipedia. In addition, we develop an
extended document concept lattice model
to combine wiki concepts and non-textual
features such as the outline and infobox.
The model can concatenate representative
sentences from non-overlapping salient lo-
cal topics for summary generation. We test
our model based on our annotated wiki ar-
ticles which topics come from TREC-QA
2004-2006 evaluations. The results show
that the model is effective in summariza-
tion and definition QA.
1 Introduction
Nowadays, ‘ask Wikipedia’ has become as pop-
ular as ‘Google it’ during Internet surfing, as
Wikipedia is able to provide reliable information
about the concept (entity) that the users want. As
the largest online encyclopedia, Wikipedia assem-
bles immense human knowledge from thousands of
volunteer editors, and exhibits significant contribu-
tions to NLP problems such as semantic related-
ness, word sense disambiguation and question an-
swering (QA).
For a given definition query, many search en-
gines (e.g., specified by ‘define:’ in Google) often
place the first sentence of the corresponding wiki1
article at the top of the returned list. The use of
1
For readability, we follow the upper/lower case rule
on web (say, ‘web pages’ and ‘on the Web’), and utilize
one-sentence snippets provides a brief and concise
description of the query. However, users often need
more information beyond such a one-sentence de-
finition, while feeling that the corresponding wiki
article is too long. Thus, there is a strong demand
to summarize wiki articles as definitions with vari-
ous lengths to suite different user needs.
The initial motivation of this investigation is to
find better definition answer for TREC-QA task
using Wikipedia (Kor and Chua, 2007). Accord-
ing to past results on TREC-QA (Voorhees, 2004;
Voorhees and Dang, 2005), definition queries are
usually recognized as being more difficult than fac-
toid and list queries. Wikipedia could help to
improve the quality of answer finding and even
provide the answers directly. Its results are bet-
ter than other external resources such as WordNet,
Gazetteers and Google’s define operator, especially
for definition QA (Lita et al., 2004).
Different from the free text used in QA and sum-
marization, a wiki article usually contains valuable
information like infobox and wiki link. Infobox
tabulates the key properties about the target, such
as birth place/date and spouse for a person as well
as type, founder and products for a company. In-
fobox, as a form of thumbnail biography, can be
considered as a mini version of a wiki article’s sum-
mary. In addition, the relevant concepts existing in
a wiki article usually refer to other wiki pages by
wiki internal links, which will form a close set of
reference relations. The current Wikipedia recur-
sively defines over 2 million concepts (in English)
via wiki links. Most of these concepts are multi-
word terms, whereas WordNet has only 50,000 plus
multi-word terms. Any term could appear in the
definition of a concept if necessary, while the total
vocabulary existing in WordNet’s glossary defini-
tion is less than 2000. Wikipedia addresses explicit
semantics for numerous concepts. These special
knowledge representations will provide additional
information for analysis and summarization. We
thus need to extend existing summarization tech-
nologies to take advantage of the knowledge repre-
sentations in Wikipedia.
‘wiki(pedia) articles’ and ‘on (the) Wikipedia’, the latter re-
ferring to the entire Wikipedia.
199
The goal of this investigation is to explore sum-
maries with different lengths in Wikipedia. Our
main contribution lies in developing a summariza-
tion method that can (i) explore more reliable asso-
ciations between passages (sentences) in huge fea-
ture space represented by wiki concepts; and (ii) ef-
fectively combine textual and non-textual features
such as infobox and outline in Wikipedia to gener-
ate summaries as definition.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In
the next section, we discuss the background of sum-
marization using both textual and structural fea-
tures. Section 3 presents the extended document
concept lattice model for summarizing wiki arti-
cles. Section 4 describes corpus construction and
experiments are described; while Section 5 con-
cludes the paper.
2 Background
Besides some heuristic rules such as sentence po-
sition and cue words, typical summarization sys-
tems measure the associations (links) between sen-
tences by term repetitions (e.g., LexRank (Erkan
and Radev, 2004)). However, sophisticated authors
usually utilize synonyms and paraphrases in vari-
ous forms rather than simple term repetitions. Fur-
nas et al. (1987) reported that two people choose
the same main key word for a single well-known
object less than 20% of the time. A case study by
Ye et al. (2007) showed that 61 different words ex-
isting in 8 relevant sentences could be mapped into
16 distinctive concepts by means of grouping terms
with close semantic (such as [British, Britain, UK]
and [war, fought, conflict, military]). However,
most existing summarization systems only consider
the repeated words between sentences, where latent
associations in terms of inter-word synonyms and
paraphrases are ignored. The incomplete data likely
lead to unreliable sentence ranking and selection for
summary generation.
To recover the hidden associations between sen-
tences, Ye et al. (2007) compute the semantic simi-
larity using WordNet. The term pairs with semantic
similarity higher than a predefined threshold will be
grouped together. They demonstrated that collect-
ing more links between sentences will lead to bet-
ter summarization as measured by ROUGE scores,
and such systems were rated among the top systems
in DUC (document understanding conference) in
2005 and 2006. This WordNet-based approach has
several shortcomings due to the problems of data
deficiency and word sense ambiguity, etc.
Wikipedia already defined millions of multi-
word concepts in separate articles. Its definition is
much larger than that of WordNet. For instance,
more than 20 kinds of songs and movies called But-
terfly , such as Butterfly (Kumi Koda song), Butter-
fly (1999 film) and Butterfly (2004 film), are listed
in Wikipedia. When people say something about
butterfly in Wikipedia, usually, a link is assigned
to refer to a particular butterfly. Following this
link, we can acquire its explicit and exact seman-
tic (Gabrilovich and Markovitch, 2007), especially
for multi-word concepts. Phrases are more im-
portant than individual words for document re-
trieval (Liu et al., 2004). We hope that the wiki con-
cepts are appropriate text representation for sum-
marization.
Generally, wiki articles have little redundancy
in their contents as they utilize encyclopedia style.
Their authors tend to use wiki links and ‘See Also’
links to refer to the involved concepts rather than
expand these concepts. In general, the guideline
for composing wiki articles is to avoid overlong
and over-complicated styles. Thus, the strategy of
‘split it’ into a series of articles is recommended;
so wiki articles are usually not too long and contain
limited number of sentences. These factors lead to
fewer links between sentences within a wiki article,
as compared to normal documents. However, the
principle of typical extractive summarization ap-
proaches is that the sentences whose contents are
repeatedly emphasized by the authors are most im-
portant and should be included (Silber and McCoy,
2002). Therefore, it is challenging to summarize
wiki articles due to low redundancy (and links)
between sentences. To overcome this problem,
we seek (i) more reliable links between passages,
(ii) appropriate weighting metric to emphasize the
salient concepts about the topic, and (iii) additional
guideline on utilizing non-textual features such as
outline and infobox. Thus, we develop wiki con-
cepts to replace ‘bag-of-words’ approach for better
link measurements between sentences, and extend
an existing summarization model on free text to in-
tegrate structural information.
By analyzing rhetorical discourse structure of
aim, background, solution, etc. or citation context,
we can obtain appropriate abstracts and the most
influential contents from scientific articles (Teufel
and Moens, 2002; Mei and Zhai, 2008). Similarly,
we believe that the structural information such as
infobox and outline is able to improve summariza-
tion as well. The outline of a wiki article using in-
ner links will render the structure of its definition.
In addition, infobox could be considered as topic
signature (Lin and Hovy, 2000) or keywords about
the topic. Since keywords and summary of a doc-
ument can be mutually boosted (Wan et al., 2007),
infobox is capable of summarization instruction.
When Ahn (2004) and Kor (2007) utilize
Wikipedia for TREC-QA definition, they treat the
Wikipedia as the Web and perform normal search
on it. High-frequency terms in the query snippets
returned from wiki index are used to extend query
and rank (re-rank) passages. These snippets usually
200
come from multiple wiki articles. Here the use-
ful information may be beyond these snippets but
existing terms are possibly irrelevant to the topic.
On the contrary, our approach concentrates on the
wiki article having the exact topic only. We as-
sume that every sentence in the article is used to de-
fine the query topic, no matter whether it contains
the term(s) of the topic or not. In order to extract
some salient sentences from the article as definition
summaries, we will build a summarization model
that describes the relations between the sentences,
where both textual and structural features are con-
sidered.
3 Our Approach
3.1 Wiki Concepts
In this subsection, we address how to find rea-
sonable and reliable links between sentences using
wiki concepts.
Consider a sentence: ‘After graduating from
Boston University in 1988, she went to work at a
Calvin Klein store in Boston.’ from a wiki article
‘Carolyn Bessette Kennedy’2
, we can find 11 dis-
tinctive terms, such as after, graduate, Boston, Uni-
versity,1988, go, work, Calvin, Klein, store, Boston,
if stop words are ignored.
However, multi-word terms such as Boston
University and Calvin Klein are linked to the
corresponding wiki articles, where their definitions
are given. Clearly, considering the anchor texts as
two wiki concepts rather than four words is more
reasonable. Their granularity are closer to semantic
content units in a summarization evaluation method
Pyramid (Nenkova et al., 2007) and nuggets in
TREC-QA . When the text is represented by
wiki concepts, whose granularity is similar to the
evaluation units, it is possibly easy to detect the
matching output using a model. Here,
• Two separate words, Calvin and Klein, are
meaningless and should be discarded; oth-
erwise, spurious links between sentences are
likely to occur.
• Boston University and Boston are processed
separately, as they are different named entities.
No link between them is appropriate3
.
• Terms such as ‘John F. Kennedy, Jr.’ and
‘John F. Kennedy’ will be considered as two
diverse wiki concepts, but we do not account
on how many repeated words there are.
• Different anchor texts, such as U.S.A. and
United States of America, are recognized as
2
All sample sentences in this paper come from this article
if not specified.
3
Consider new pseudo sentence: ‘After graduating from
Stanford in 1988, she went to work ... in Boston.’ We do not
need assign link between Stanford and Boston as well.
an identical concept since they refer to the
same wiki article.
• Two concepts, such as money and cash, will
be merged into an identical concept when their
semantics are similar.
In wiki articles, the first occurrence of a wiki
concept is tagged by a wiki link, but there is no
such a link to its subsequent occurrences in the re-
maining parts of the text in most cases. To allevi-
ate this problem, a set of heuristic rules is proposed
to unify the subsequent occurrences of concepts in
normal text with previous wiki concepts in the an-
chor text. These heuristic rules include: (i) edit dis-
tance between linked wiki concept and candidates
in normal text is larger than a predefined threshold;
and (ii) partially overlapping words beginning with
capital letter, etc.
After filtering out wiki concepts, the words re-
maining in wiki articles could be grouped into two
sets: close-class terms like pronouns and preposi-
tions as well as open-class terms like nouns and
verbs. For example, in the sentence ‘She died at age
33, along with her husband and sister’, the open-
class terms include die, age, 33, husband and sister.
Even though most open-class terms are defined in
Wikipedia as well, the authors of the article do not
consider it necessary to present their references us-
ing wiki links. Hence, we need to extend wiki con-
cepts by concatenating them with these open-class
terms to form an extended vector. In addition, we
ignore all close-class terms, since we cannot find
efficient method to infer reliable links across them.
As a result, texts are represented as a vector of wiki
concepts.
Once we introduce wiki concepts to replace typ-
ical ‘bag-of-words’ approach, the dimensions of
concept space will reach six order of magnitudes.
We cannot ignore the data spareness issue and com-
putation cost when the concept space is so huge.
Actually, for a wiki article and a set of relevant arti-
cles, the involved concepts are limited, and we need
to explore them in a small sub-space. For instance,
59 articles about Kennedy family in Wikipedia have
10,399 distinctive wiki concepts only, where 5,157
wiki concepts exist twice and more. Computing the
overlapping among them is feasible.
Furthermore, we need to merge the wiki concepts
with identical or close semantic (namely, building
links between these synonyms and paraphrases).
We measure the semantic similarity between two
concepts by using cosine distance between their
wiki articles, which are represented as the vectors
of wiki concepts as well. For computation effi-
ciency, we calculate semantic similarities between
all promising concept pairs beforehand, and then
retrieve the value in a Hash table directly. We spent
CPU time of about 12.5 days preprocessing the se-
201
mantic calculation. Details are available at our tech-
nical report (Lu et al., 2008).
Following the principle of TFIDF, we define
the weighing metric for the vector represented
by wiki concepts using the entire Wikipedia as
the observation collection. We define the CFIDF
weight of wiki concept i in article j as:
wi,j = cfi,j· idfi =
ni,j
P
k nk,j
· log
|D|
|dj : ti ∈ dj|
,
(1)
where cfi,j is the frequency of concept i in arti-
cle j; idfi is the inverse frequency of concept i
in Wikipedia; and D is the number of articles in
Wikipedia. Here, sparse wiki concepts will have
more contribution.
In brief, we represent articles in terms of wiki
concepts using the steps below.
1. Extract the wiki concepts marked by wiki
links in context.
2. Detect the remaining open-class terms as wiki
concepts as well.
3. Merge concepts whose semantic similarity is
larger than predefined threshold (0.35 in our
experiments) into the one with largest idf.
4. Weight all concepts according to Eqn (1).
3.2 Document Concept Lattice Model
Next, we build the document concept lattice (DCL)
for articles represented by wiki concepts. For il-
lustration on how DCL is built, we consider 8 sen-
tences from DUC 2005 Cluster d324e (Ye et al.,
2007) as case study. 8 sentences, represented by 16
distinctive concepts A-P, are considered as the base
nodes 1-8 as shown in Figure 1. Once we group
nodes by means of the maximal common concepts
among base nodes hierarchically, we can obtain the
derived nodes 11-41, which form a DCL. A derived
node will annotate a local topic through a set of
shared concepts, and define a sub concept space that
contains the covered base nodes under proper pro-
jection. The derived node, accompanied with its
base nodes, is apt to interpret a particular argument
(or statement) about the involved concepts. Further-
more, one base node among them, coupled with the
corresponding sentence, is capable of this interpre-
tation and could represent the other base nodes to
some degree.
In order to Extract a set of sentences to cover
key distinctive local topics (arguments) as much as
possible, we need to select a set of important non-
overlapping derived nodes. We measure the impor-
tance of node N in DCL of article j in term of rep-
resentative power (RP) as:
RP(N) =
X
ci∈N
(|ci|· wi,j)/ log(|N|), (2)
       
	 
   
  
     
	
 





     
	
 



 

     
	
 



     
	
 


 
         
	 
  
  
     
	
 





     
	



    
	  
     
	



        
	




   
	



 

   
	 
 
     
	




     
	



  
	



    
	





   
	  
 
    
	 
 



    
	 
 
                 
	



          
	 



 
Figure 1: A sample of concept lattice
where concept ci in node N is weighted by wi,j
according to Eqn (1), and |N| denotes the concept
number in N (if N is a base node) or the number
of distinct concepts in |N| (if N is a derived node),
respectively. Here, |ci| represents the c’s frequency
in N, and log(|N|) reflects N’s cost if N is selected
(namely, how many concepts are used in N). For
example, 7 concepts in sentence 1 lead to the total
|c| of 34 if their weights are set to 1 equally. Its
RP is RP(1) = 34/log(7) = 40.23. Similarly,
RP(31) = 6 ∗ 3/log(3) = 37.73.
By selecting a set of non-overlapping derived
nodes with maximal RP, we are able to obtain a set
of local topics with highest representativeness and
diversity. Next, a representative sentence with max-
imal RP in each of such derived nodes is chosen to
represent the local topics in observation. When the
length of the required summary changes, the num-
ber of the local topics needed will also be modi-
fied. Consequently, we are able to select the sets of
appropriate derived nodes in diverse generalization
levels, and obtain various versions of summaries
containing the local topics with appropriate gran-
ularities.
In the DCL example shown in Figure 1, if we ex-
pect to have a summary with two sentences, we will
select the derived nodes 31 and 32 with highest RP.
Nodes 31 and 32 will infer sentences 4 and 2, and
they will be concatenated to form a summary. If the
summary is increased to three sentences, then three
derived nodes 31, 23 and 33 with maximal RP will
render representative sentences 4, 5 and 6. Hence,
the different number of actual sentences (4+5+6 vs.
4+2) will be selected depending on the length of
the required summary. The uniqueness of DCL is
that the sentences used in a shorter summary may
not appear in a longer summary for the same source
text. According to the distinctive derived nodes in
diverse levels, the sentences with different general-
ization abilities are chosen to generate various sum-
maries.
202
Figure 2: Properties in infobox and their support
sentences
3.3 Model of Extended Document Concept
Lattice (EDCL)
Different from free text and general web docu-
ments, wiki articles contain structural features, such
as infoboxes and outlines, which correlate strongly
to nuggets in definition TREC-QA. By integrating
these structural features, we will generate better RP
measures in derived topics which facilitates better
priority assignment in local topics.
3.3.1 Outline: Wiki Macro Structure
A long wiki article usually has a hierarchical out-
line using inner links to organize its contents. For
example, wiki article Cat consists of a set of hier-
archical sections under the outline of mouth, legs,
Metabolism, genetics, etc. This outline provides
a hierarchical clustering of sub-topics assigned by
its author(s), which implies that selecting sentences
from diverse sections of outline is apt to obtain a
balanced summary. Actually, DCL could be con-
sidered as the composite of many kinds of clus-
terings (Ye et al., 2007). Importing the clustering
from outline into DCL will be helpful for the gen-
eration of a balanced summary. We thus incorpo-
rate the structure of outline into DCL as follows:
(i) treat section titles as concepts in the pseudo de-
rived nodes; (ii) link these pseudo nodes and the
base nodes in this section if they share concepts;
and (iii) revise base nodes’ RP in Eqn (2) (see Sec-
tion 3.3.3).
3.3.2 Infobox: a Mini Version of Summary
Infobox tabulates the key properties about the topic
concept of a wiki article. It could be considered
as a mini summary, where many nuggets in TREC-
QA are included. As properties in infobox are not
complete sentences and do not present relevant ar-
guments, it is inappropriate to concatenate them
as a summary. However, they are good indicators
for summary generation. Following the terms in a
property (e.g., spouse name and graduation school),
            	 
    
                   

   !   "
# $ % $ & ' ( & ) * + ,
- . + / $ ( )
0 ( 1 ' 2 ' 3
4
5
6
7
8
5
7
6
9
:
; < = > ? > @
Figure 3: Extend document concept lattice by out-
line and infobox in Wikipedia
we can find the corresponding sentences in the body
of the text that contains such terms4
. It describes the
details about the involved property and provides the
relevant arguments. We call it support sentence.
Now, again, we have a hierarchy: Infobox +
properties + support sentences. This hierarchy can
be used to render a summary by concatenating the
support sentences. This summary is inferred from
hand-crafted infobox directly and is a full version
of infobox; so its quality is guaranteed. However, it
is possibly inapplicable due to its improper length.
Following the iterative reinforcement approach for
summarization and keyword extraction (Wan et al.,
2007), it could be used to refine other versions of
summaries. Hence, we utilize infobox and its sup-
port sentences to modify nodes’ RPs in DCL so that
the priority of local topics has bias to infobox. To
achieve it, we extend DCL by inserting a hierarchy
from infobox: (i) generate a pseudo derived node
for each property; (ii) link every derived node to
its support sentences; and (iii) cover these pseudo
nodes by a virtual derived node called infobox.
3.3.3 Summary Generation from EDCL
In DCL, sentences with common concepts form lo-
cal topics by autonomous approach, where shared
concepts are depicted in derived nodes. Now we
introduce two additional hierarchies derived from
outline and infobox into DCL to refine RPs of
salient local topics for summarization, which will
render a model named extended document con-
cept lattice (EDCL). As shown in Figure 3, base
nodes in EDCL covered by pseudo derived nodes
will increase their RPs when they receive influence
from outline and infobox. Also, if RPs of their cov-
ered base nodes changes, the original derived nodes
will modify their RPs as well. Therefore, the new
4
Sometimes, we can find more than one appropriate sen-
tence for a property. In our investigation, we select top two
sentences with the occurrence of the particular term if avail-
able.
203
RPs in derived nodes and based nodes will lead to
better priority of ranking derived nodes, which is
likely to result in a better summary. One important
direct consequence of introducing the extra hierar-
chies is to increase the RP of nodes relevant to out-
line and infobox so that the summaries from EDCL
are likely to follow human-crafted ones.
The influence of human effects are transmitted
in a ‘V’ curve approach. We utilize the following
steps to generate a summary with a given length
(say m sentences) from EDCL.
1. Build a normal DCL, and compute RP for
each node according to Eqn 2.
2. Generate pseudo derived nodes (denoted by
P) based on outline and infobox, and link the
pseudo derived nodes to their relevant base
nodes (denoted by B0).
3. Update RP in B0 by magnifying the contri-
bution of shared concepts between P and N0
5
.
4. Update RP in derived nodes that cover B0 on
account of the new RP in B0.
5. Select m non-overlapping derived nodes with
maximal RP as the current observation.
6. Concatenate representative sentences with
top RP from each derived node in the current
observation as output.
7. If one representative sentence is covered by
more than one derived node in step 5, the
output will be less than m sentences. In this
case, we need to increase m and repeat step
5-6 until m sentences are selected.
4 Experiments
The purposes of our experiment are two-fold: (i)
evaluate the effects of wiki definition to the TREC-
QA task; and (ii) examine the characteristics and
summarization performance of EDCL.
4.1 Corpus Construction
We adopt the tasks of TREC-QA in 2004-2006
(TREC 12-14) as test scope. We retrieve arti-
cles with identical topic names from Wikipedia6
.
Non-letter transformations are permitted (e.g., from
‘Carolyn Bessette-Kennedy’ to ‘Carolyn Bessette-
Kennedy’). Because our focus is summariza-
tion evaluation, we ignore the cases in TREC-
QA where the exact topics do not exist in
Wikipedia, even though relevant topics are avail-
able (e.g., ‘France wins World Cup in soccer’
in TREC-QA vs. ‘France national football team’
5
We magnify it by adding |c0| ∗ wc ∗ η. Here, c0 is the
shared concepts between P and N0, and η is the influence
factor and set to 2-5 in our experiments.
6
The dump is available at
http://download.wikimedia.org/. Our dump
was downloaded in Sept 2007.
and ‘2006 FIFA World Cup’ in Wikipedia). Fi-
nally, among the 215 topics in TREC 12-14, we ob-
tain 180 wiki articles with the same topics.
We ask 15 undergraduate and graduate students
from the Department of English Literature in Na-
tional University of Singapore to choose 7-14 sen-
tences in the above wiki articles as extractive sum-
maries. Each wiki article is annotated by 3 per-
sons separately. In order for the volunteers to avoid
the bias from TREC-QA corpus, we do not provide
queries and nuggets used in TREC-QA. Similar to
TREC nuggets, we call the selected sentences wiki
nuggets. Wiki nuggets provides the ground truth
of the performance evaluation, since some TREC
nuggets are possibly unavailable in Wikipedia.
Here, we did not ask the volunteers to create
snippets (like TREC-QA) or compose an abstrac-
tive summary (like DUC). This is because of the
special style of wiki articles: the entire document
is a long summary without trivial stuff. Usually, we
do not need to concatenate key phrases from diverse
sentences to form a recapitulative sentence. Mean-
while, selecting a set of salient sentences to form a
concise version is a relatively less time-consuming
but applicable approach. Snippets, by and large,
lead to bad readability, and therefore we do not em-
ploy this approach.
In addition, the volunteers also annotate 7-10
pairs of question/answer for each article for fur-
ther research on QA using Wikipedia. The cor-
pus, called TREC-Wiki collection, is available at
our site (http://nuscu.ddns.comp.nus.edu.sg). The
system of Wikipedia summarization using EDCL is
launched on the Web as well.
4.2 Corpus Exploration
4.2.1 Answer availability
The availability of answers in Wikipedia for TREC-
QA could be measured in two aspects: (i) how
many TREC-QA topics have been covered by
Wikipedia? and (ii) how many nuggets could be
found in the corresponding wiki article? We find
that (i) over 80% of topics (180/215) in the TREC
12-14 are available in Wikipedia, and (ii) about
47% TREC nuggets could be detected directly from
Wikipedia (examining applet modified from Pour-
pre (Lin and Demner-Fushman, 2006)). In contrast,
6,463 nuggets existing in TREC-QA 12-14 are dis-
tributed in 4,175 articles from AQUAINT corpus.
We can say that Wikipedia is the answer goldmine
for TREC-QA questions.
When we look into these TREC nuggets in wiki
articles closely, we find that most of them are em-
bedded in wiki links or relevant to infobox. It sug-
gests that they are indicators for sentences having
nuggets.
204
4.2.2 Correlation between TREC nuggets
and non-text features
Analyzing the features used could let us understand
summarization better (Nenkova and Louis, 2008).
Here, we focus on the statistical analysis between
TREC/wiki nuggets and non-textual features such
as wiki links, infobox and outline. The features
used are introduced in Table 1. The correlation co-
efficients are listed in Table 2.
Observation: (1) On the whole, wiki nuggets
exhibit higher correlation to non-textual features
than TREC nuggets do. The possible reason is that
TREC nuggets are extracted from AQUAINT rather
than Wikipedia. (2) As compared to other features,
infobox and wiki links strongly relate to nuggets.
They are thus reliable features beyond text for sum-
marization. (3) Sentence positions exhibit weak
correlation to nuggets, even though the first sen-
tence of an article is a good one-sentence definition.
Feature Description
Link Does the sentence have link?
Topic rel. Does the sentence contain any
word in topic concept?
Outline rel. Does the sentence hold word in
its section title(s) (outline)?
Infobox rel. Is it a support sentence?
Position First sentence of the article, first
sentence and last sentence of a
paragraph, or others?
Table 1: Features for correlation measurement
Feature TREC nuggets Wiki nuggets
Link 0.087 0.120
Topic rel. 0.038 0.058
Outline rel. 0.078 0.076
Infobox rel. 0.089 0.170
Position -0.047 0.021
Table 2: Correlation Coefficients between non-
textual features in Wiki and TREC/wiki nuggets
4.3 Statistical Characteristics of EDCL
We design four runs with various configurations as
shown in Table 3. We implement a sentence re-
ranking program using MMR (maximal marginal
relevance) (Carbonell and Goldstein, 1998) in Run
1, which is considered as the test baseline. We ap-
ply standard DCL in Run 2, where concepts are
determined according to their definitions in Word-
Net (Ye et al., 2007). We introduce wiki concepts
for standard DCL in Run 3. Run 4 is the full ver-
sion of EDCL, which considers both outline and in-
fobox.
Observations: (1) In Run 1, the average num-
ber of distinctive words per article is near to 1200
after stop words are filtered out. When we merge
diverse words having similar semantic according to
WordNet concepts , we obtain 873 concepts per ar-
ticle on average in Run 2. The word number de-
creases by about 28% as a result of the omission
of close-class terms and the merging of synonyms
and paraphrases. (2) When wiki concepts are intro-
duced in Run 3, the number of concepts continues
to decrease. Here, some adjacent single-word terms
are merged into wiki concepts if they are annotated
by wiki links. Even though the reduction of total
concepts is limited, these new wiki concepts will
group the terms that cannot be detected by Word-
Net. (3) DCL based on WordNet concepts has less
derived nodes (Run 3) than DCL based on wiki con-
cepts does, although the former has more concepts.
It implies that wiki concepts lead to higher link den-
sity in DCL as more links between concepts can be
detected. (4) Outline and infobox will bring addi-
tional 54 derived nodes (from 1695 to 1741). Ad-
ditional computation cost is limited when they are
introduced into EDCL.
Run 1 Word co-occurrence + MMR
Run 2 Basic DCL model (WordNet concepts)
Run 3 DCL + wiki concepts
Run 4 EDCL (DCL + wiki concepts + outline
+ infobox)
Table 3: Test configurations
Concepts Base nodes Derived nodes
Run 1 1173 (number of words)
Run 2 873 259 1517
Run 3 826 259 1695
Run 4 831 259 1741
Table 4: Average node/concept numbers in DCL
and EDCL
4.4 Summarization Performance of EDCL
We evaluate the performance of EDCL from two as-
pects such as contribution to TREC-QA definition
task and accuracy of summarization in our TREC-
Wiki collection.
Since factoid/list questions are about the most es-
sential information of the target as well, like Cui’s
approach (2005), we treat factoid/list answers as
essential nuggets and add them to the gold stan-
dard list of definition nuggets. We set the sentence
number of summaries generated by the system to
205
12. We examine the definition quality by nugget re-
call (NR) and an approximation to nugget precision
(NP) on answer length. These scores are combined
using the F1 and F3 measures. The recall in F3
is weighted three times as important as precision.
The evaluation is automatically conducted by Pour-
pre v1.1 (Lin and Demner-Fushman, 2006).
Based on the performance of EDCL for TREC-
QA definition task listed in Table 5, we observe
that: (i) When EDCL considers wiki concepts and
structural features such as outline and infobox, its
F-scores increase significantly (Run 3 and Run 4).
(ii) Table 5 also lists the results of Cui’s system
(marked by asterisk) using bigram soft patterns
(Cui et al., 2005), which is trained by TREC-12
and tested on TREC 13. Our EDCL can achieve
comparable or better F-scores on the 180 topics in
TREC 12-14. It suggests that Wikipedia could pro-
vide high-quality definition directly even though we
do not use AQUAINT. (iii) The precision of EDCL
in Run 4 outperforms that of soft-pattern approach
remarkably (from 0.34 to 0.497). One possible rea-
son is that all sentences in a wiki article are oriented
to its topic, and the sentence irrelevant to its topic
hardly occurs.
NR NP F1 F3
Run 1 0.247 0.304 0.273 0.252
Run 2 0.262 0.325 0.290 0.267
Run 3 0.443 0.431 0.431 0.442
Run 4 0.538 0.497 0.517 0.534
Bigram SP* 0.552 0.340 0.421 0.510
Table 5: EDCL evaluated by TREC-QA nuggets
 
 
 
 
 
 
 	 


 	 


 	 


 	 


     
        





Figure 4: Performance of summarizing Wikipedia
using EDCL with different configurations
We also test the performance of EDCL using ex-
tractive summaries in TREC-Wiki collection. By
means of comparing to each set of sentences se-
lected by a volunteer, we examine how many ex-
act annotated sentences are selected by the system
using different configurations. The average recalls
and precisions as well as their F-scores are shown
in Figure 4.
Observations: (i) The structural information of
Wikipeida has significant contribution to EDCL for
summarization. We manually examine some sum-
maries and find that the sentences containing more
wiki links are apt to be chosen when wiki concepts
are introduced in EDCL. Most sentences in output
summaries in Run 4 usually have 1-3 links and rel-
evant to infobox or outline. (ii) When using wiki
concepts, infobox and outline to enrich DCL, we
find that the precision of sentence selection has im-
proved more than the recall. It reaffirms the con-
clusion in the previous TREC-QA test in this sub-
section. (iii) In addition, we manually examine the
summaries on some wiki articles with common top-
ics, such as car, house, money, etc. We find that the
summaries generated by EDCL could effectively
grasp the key information about the topics when the
sentence number of summaries exceeds 10.
5 Conclusion and Future Work
Wikipedia recursively defines enormous concepts
in huge vector space of wiki concepts. The explicit
semantic representation via wiki concepts allows
us to obtain more reliable links between passages.
Wikipedia’s special structural features, such as wiki
links, infobox and outline, reflect the hidden human
knowledge. The first sentence of a wiki article, in-
fobox (and its support sentences), outline (and its
relevant sentences), as well as the entire document
could be considered as diverse summaries with var-
ious lengths. In our proposed model, local topics
are autonomously organized in a lattice structure
according to their overlapping relations. The hier-
archies derived from infobox and outline are im-
ported to refine the representative powers of local
topics by emphasizing the concepts relevant to in-
fobox and outline. Experiments indicate that our
proposed model exhibits promising performance in
summarization and QA definition tasks.
Of course, there are rooms to further improve the
model. Possible improvements includes: (a) using
advanced semantic and parsing technologies to de-
tect the support and relevant sentences for infobox
and outline; (b) summarizing multiple articles in a
wiki category; and (c) exploring the mapping from
close-class terms to open-class terms for more links
between passages is likely to forward some interest-
ing results.
More generally, the knowledge hidden in non-
textual features of Wikipedia allow the model to
harvest better definition summaries. It is challeng-
ing but possibly fruitful to recast the normal docu-
ments with wiki styles so as to adopt EDCL for free
text and enrich the research efforts on other NLP
tasks.
206
References
[Ahn et al.2004] David Ahn, Valentin Jijkoun, et al.
2004. Using Wikipedia at the TREC QA Track. In
Text REtrieval Conference.
[Carbonell and Goldstein1998] J. Carbonell and
J. Goldstein. 1998. The use of mmr, diversity-based
re-ranking for reordering documents and producing
summaries. In SIGIR, pages 335–336.
[Cui et al.2005] Hang Cui, Min-Yen Kan, and Tat-Seng
Chua. 2005. Generic soft pattern models for de-
finitional question answering. In Proceedings of
the 28th annual international ACM SIGIR confer-
ence on research and development in information re-
trieval, pages 384–391, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
[Erkan and Radev2004] Güneş Erkan and Dragomir R.
Radev. 2004. LexRank: Graph-based Lexical Cen-
trality as Salience in Text Summarization. Artificial
Intelligence Research, 22:457–479.
[Furnas et al.1987] George W. Furnas, Thomas K. Lan-
dauer, Louis M. Gomez, and Susan T. Dumais.
1987. The vocabulary problem in human-system
communication. Communications of the ACM,
30(11):964–971.
[Gabrilovich and Markovitch2007] Evgeniy
Gabrilovich and Shaul Markovitch. 2007. Com-
puting semantic relatedness using wikipedia-based
explicit semantic analysis. In Proceedings of The
Twentieth International Joint Conference for Arti-
ficial Intelligence, pages 1606–1611, Hyderabad,
India.
[Kor and Chua2007] Kian-Wei Kor and Tat-Seng Chua.
2007. Interesting nuggets and their impact on defin-
itional question answering. In Proceedings of the
30th annual international ACM SIGIR conference
on Research and development in information re-
trieval, pages 335–342, New York, NY, USA. ACM.
[Lin and Demner-Fushman2006] Jimmy J. Lin and
Dina Demner-Fushman. 2006. Methods for auto-
matically evaluating answers to complex questions.
Information Retrieval, 9(5):565–587.
[Lin and Hovy2000] Chin-Yew Lin and Eduard Hovy.
2000. The automated acquisition of topic signa-
tures for text summarization. In Proceedings of the
18th conference on Computational linguistics, pages
495–501, Morristown, NJ, USA. ACL.
[Lita et al.2004] Lucian Vlad Lita, Warren A. Hunt, and
Eric Nyberg. 2004. Resource analysis for ques-
tion answering. In Proceedings of the ACL 2004
on Interactive poster and demonstration sessions,
page 18, Morristown, NJ, USA. ACL.
[Liu et al.2004] Shuang Liu, Fang Liu, Clement Yu, and
Weiyi Meng. 2004. An effective approach to docu-
ment retrieval via utilizing wordnet and recognizing
phrases. In Proceedings of the 27th annual interna-
tional ACM SIGIR conference on Research and de-
velopment in information retrieval, pages 266–272,
New York, NY, USA. ACM.
[Lu et al.2008] Jie Lu, Shiren Ye, and Tat-Seng
Chua. 2008. Explore semantic similarity
and semantic relatedness via wikipedia. Tech-
nical report, National Univeristy of Singapore,
http://nuscu.ddns.comp.nus.edu.sg.
[Mei and Zhai2008] Qiaozhu Mei and ChengXiang
Zhai. 2008. Generating impact-based summaries
for scientific literature. In Proceedings of ACL-08:
HLT, pages 816–824, Columbus, Ohio, June. ACL.
[Nenkova and Louis2008] Ani Nenkova and Annie
Louis. 2008. Can you summarize this? identify-
ing correlates of input difficulty for multi-document
summarization. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT,
pages 825–833, Columbus, Ohio, June. ACL.
[Nenkova et al.2007] Ani Nenkova, Rebecca Passon-
neau, and Kathleen McKeown. 2007. The pyra-
mid method: Incorporating human content selection
variation in summarization evaluation. ACM Trans-
actions on Speech and Language Processing, 4(2):4.
[Silber and McCoy2002] H. Grogory Silber and Kath-
leen F. McCoy. 2002. Efficiently computed lexical
chains as an intermediate representation for auto-
matic text summarization. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(4):487–496.
[Teufel and Moens2002] Simone Teufel and Marc
Moens. 2002. Summarizing scientific articles:
experiments with relevance and rhetorical sta-
tus. Computational Linguistics, 28(4):409–445,
December.
[Voorhees and Dang2005] Ellen M. Voorhees and
Hoa Trang Dang. 2005. Overview of the trec
2005 question answering track. In Text REtrieval
Conference.
[Voorhees2004] Ellen M. Voorhees. 2004. Overview
of the trec 2004 question answering track. In Text
REtrieval Conference.
[Wan et al.2007] Xiaojun Wan, Jianwu Yang, and Jian-
guo Xiao. 2007. Towards an iterative reinforcement
approach for simultaneous document summarization
and keyword extraction. In Proceedings of the 45th
Annual Meeting of the Association of Computational
Linguistics, pages 552–559, Prague, Czech Repub-
lic, June. ACL.
[Ye et al.2007] Shiren Ye, Tat-Seng Chua, Min-Yen
Kan, and Long Qiu. 2007. Document con-
cept lattice for text understanding and summariza-
tion. Information Processing and Management,
43(6):1643–1662.
207
