b'Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL, pages 141148,
Ann Arbor, June 2005. c

2005 Association for Computational Linguistics
Modeling Local Coherence: An Entity-based Approach
Regina Barzilay
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
regina@csail.mit.edu
Mirella Lapata
School of Informatics
University of Edinburgh
mlap@inf.ed.ac.uk
Abstract
This paper considers the problem of auto-
matic assessment of local coherence. We
present a novel entity-based representa-
tion of discourse which is inspired by Cen-
tering Theory and can be computed au-
tomatically from raw text. We view co-
herence assessment as a ranking learning
problem and show that the proposed dis-
course representation supports the effec-
tive learning of a ranking function. Our
experiments demonstrate that the induced
model achieves significantly higher ac-
curacy than a state-of-the-art coherence
model.
1 Introduction
A key requirement for any system that produces
text is the coherence of its output. Not surprisingly,
a variety of coherence theories have been devel-
oped over the years (e.g., Mann and Thomson, 1988;
Grosz et al. 1995) and their principles have found
application in many symbolic text generation sys-
tems (e.g., Scott and de Souza, 1990; Kibble and
Power, 2004). The ability of these systems to gener-
ate high quality text, almost indistinguishable from
human writing, makes the incorporation of coher-
ence theories in robust large-scale systems partic-
ularly appealing. The task is, however, challenging
considering that most previous efforts have relied on
handcrafted rules, valid only for limited domains,
with no guarantee of scalability or portability (Re-
iter and Dale, 2000). Furthermore, coherence con-
straints are often embedded in complex representa-
tions (e.g., Asher and Lascarides, 2003) which are
hard to implement in a robust application.
This paper focuses on local coherence, which
captures text relatedness at the level of sentence-to-
sentence transitions, and is essential for generating
globally coherent text. The key premise of our work
is that the distribution of entities in locally coherent
texts exhibits certain regularities. This assumption is
not arbitrary  some of these regularities have been
recognized in Centering Theory (Grosz et al., 1995)
and other entity-based theories of discourse.
The algorithm introduced in the paper automat-
ically abstracts a text into a set of entity transi-
tion sequences, a representation that reflects distri-
butional, syntactic, and referential information about
discourse entities. We argue that this representation
of discourse allows the system to learn the proper-
ties of locally coherent texts opportunistically from
a given corpus, without recourse to manual annota-
tion or a predefined knowledge base.
We view coherence assessment as a ranking prob-
lem and present an efficiently learnable model that
orders alternative renderings of the same informa-
tion based on their degree of local coherence. Such
a mechanism is particularly appropriate for gener-
ation and summarization systems as they can pro-
duce multiple text realizations of the same underly-
ing content, either by varying parameter values, or
by relaxing constraints that control the generation
process. A system equipped with a ranking mech-
anism, could compare the quality of the candidate
outputs, much in the same way speech recognizers
employ language models at the sentence level.
Our evaluation results demonstrate the effective-
ness of our entity-based ranking model within the
general framework of coherence assessment. First,
we evaluate the utility of the model in a text order-
ing task where our algorithm has to select a max-
imally coherent sentence order from a set of can-
didate permutations. Second, we compare the rank-
ings produced by the model against human coher-
ence judgments elicited for automatically generated
summaries. In both experiments, our method yields
141
\x0ca significant improvement over a state-of-the-art co-
herence model based on Latent Semantic Analysis
(Foltz et al., 1998).
In the following section, we provide an overview
of existing work on the automatic assessment of lo-
cal coherence. Then, we introduce our entity-based
representation, and describe our ranking model.
Next, we present the experimental framework and
data. Evaluation results conclude the paper.
2 Related Work
Local coherence has been extensively studied within
the modeling framework put forward by Centering
Theory (Grosz et al., 1995; Walker et al., 1998;
Strube and Hahn, 1999; Poesio et al., 2004; Kibble
and Power, 2004). One of the main assumptions un-
derlying Centering is that a text segment which fore-
grounds a single entity is perceived to be more co-
herent than a segment in which multiple entities are
discussed. The theory formalizes this intuition by in-
troducing constraints on the distribution of discourse
entities in coherent text. These constraints are for-
mulated in terms of focus, the most salient entity in
a discourse segment, and transition of focus between
adjacent sentences. The theory also establishes con-
straints on the linguistic realization of focus, sug-
gesting that it is more likely to appear in prominent
syntactic positions (such as subject or object), and to
be referred to with anaphoric expressions.
A great deal of research has attempted to translate
principles of Centering Theory into a robust coher-
ence metric (Miltsakaki and Kukich, 2000; Hasler,
2004; Karamanis et al., 2004). Such a translation is
challenging in several respects: one has to specify
the free parameters of the system (Poesio et al.,
2004) and to determine ways of combining the ef-
fects of various constraints. A common methodol-
ogy that has emerged in this research is to develop
and evaluate coherence metrics on manually anno-
tated corpora. For instance, Miltsakaki and Kukich
(2000) annotate a corpus of student essays with tran-
sition information, and show that the distribution of
transitions correlates with human grades. Karamanis
et al. (2004) use a similar methodology to compare
coherence metrics with respect to their usefulness
for text planning in generation.
The present work differs from these approaches
in two key respects. First, our method does not re-
quire manual annotation of input texts. We do not
aim to produce complete centering annotations; in-
stead, our inference procedure is based on a dis-
course representation that preserves essential entity
transition information, and can be computed auto-
matically from raw text. Second, we learn patterns
of entity distribution from a corpus, without attempt-
ing to directly implement or refine Centering con-
straints.
3 The Coherence Model
In this section we introduce our entity-based repre-
sentation of discourse. We describe how it can be
computed and how entity transition patterns can be
extracted. The latter constitute a rich feature space
on which probabilistic inference is performed.
Text Representation Each text is represented
by an entity grid, a two-dimensional array that cap-
tures the distribution of discourse entities across text
sentences. We follow Miltsakaki and Kukich (2000)
in assuming that our unit of analysis is the tradi-
tional sentence (i.e., a main clause with accompa-
nying subordinate and adjunct clauses). The rows of
the grid correspond to sentences, while the columns
correspond to discourse entities. By discourse en-
tity we mean a class of coreferent noun phrases. For
each occurrence of a discourse entity in the text, the
corresponding grid cell contains information about
its grammatical role in the given sentence. Each grid
column thus corresponds to a string from a set of
categories reflecting the entitys presence or absence
in a sequence of sentences. Our set consists of four
symbols: S (subject), O (object), X (neither subject
nor object) and  (gap which signals the entitys ab-
sence from a given sentence).
Table 1 illustrates a fragment of an entity grid
constructed for the text in Table 2. Since the text
contains six sentences, the grid columns are of
length six. Consider for instance the grid column for
the entity trial, [O     X]. It records that trial
is present in sentences 1 and 6 (as O and X respec-
tively) but is absent from the rest of the sentences.
Grid Computation The ability to identify and
cluster coreferent discourse entities is an impor-
tant prerequisite for computing entity grids. The
same entity may appear in different linguistic forms,
e.g., Microsoft Corp., Microsoft, and the company,
but should still be mapped to a single entry in the
grid. Table 1 exemplifies the entity grid for the text
in Table 2 when coreference resolution is taken into
account. To automatically compute entity classes,
142
\x0cDepartment
Trial
Microsoft
Evidence
Competitors
Markets
Products
Brands
Case
Netscape
Software
Tactics
Government
Suit
Earnings
1 S O S X O           1
2   O   X S O        2
3   S O     S O O     3
4   S         S    4
5             S O  5
6  X S            O 6
Table 1: A fragment of the entity grid. Noun phrases
are represented by their head nouns.
1 [The Justice Department]S is conducting an [anti-trust
trial]O against [Microsoft Corp.]X with [evidence]X that
[the company]S is increasingly attempting to crush
[competitors]O.
2 [Microsoft]O is accused of trying to forcefully buy into
[markets]X where [its own products]S are not competitive
enough to unseat [established brands]O.
3 [The case]S revolves around [evidence]O of [Microsoft]S
aggressively pressuring [Netscape]O into merging
[browser software]O.
4 [Microsoft]S claims [its tactics]S are commonplace and
good economically.
5 [The government]S may file [a civil suit]O ruling
that [conspiracy]S to curb [competition]O through
[collusion]X is [a violation of the Sherman Act]O.
6 [Microsoft]S continues to show [increased earnings]O de-
spite [the trial]X.
Table 2: Summary augmented with syntactic anno-
tations for grid computation.
we employ a state-of-the-art noun phrase coref-
erence resolution system (Ng and Cardie, 2002)
trained on the MUC (67) data sets. The system de-
cides whether two NPs are coreferent by exploit-
ing a wealth of features that fall broadly into four
categories: lexical, grammatical, semantic and posi-
tional.
Once we have identified entity classes, the next
step is to fill out grid entries with relevant syn-
tactic information. We employ a robust statistical
parser (Collins, 1997) to determine the constituent
structure for each sentence, from which subjects (s),
objects (o), and relations other than subject or ob-
ject (x) are identified. Passive verbs are recognized
using a small set of patterns, and the underlying deep
grammatical role for arguments involved in the pas-
sive construction is entered in the grid (see the grid
cell o for Microsoft, Sentence 2, Table 2).
When a noun is attested more than once with a dif-
ferent grammatical role in the same sentence, we de-
fault to the role with the highest grammatical rank-
ing: subjects are ranked higher than objects, which
in turn are ranked higher than the rest. For exam-
ple, the entity Microsoft is mentioned twice in Sen-
tence 1 with the grammatical roles x (for Microsoft
Corp.) and s (for the company), but is represented
only by s in the grid (see Tables 1 and 2).
Coherence Assessment We introduce a method
for coherence assessment that is based on grid rep-
resentation. A fundamental assumption underlying
our approach is that the distribution of entities in
coherent texts exhibits certain regularities reflected
in grid topology. Some of these regularities are for-
malized in Centering Theory as constraints on tran-
sitions of local focus in adjacent sentences. Grids of
coherent texts are likely to have some dense columns
(i.e., columns with just a few gaps such as Microsoft
in Table 1) and many sparse columns which will
consist mostly of gaps (see markets, earnings in Ta-
ble 1). One would further expect that entities cor-
responding to dense columns are more often sub-
jects or objects. These characteristics will be less
pronounced in low-coherence texts.
Inspired by Centering Theory, our analysis re-
volves around patterns of local entity transitions.
A local entity transition is a sequence {S,O,X,}n
that represents entity occurrences and their syntactic
roles in n adjacent sentences. Local transitions can
be easily obtained from a grid as continuous subse-
quences of each column. Each transition will have a
certain probability in a given grid. For instance, the
probability of the transition [S ] in the grid from
Table 1 is 0.08 (computed as a ratio of its frequency
(i.e., six) divided by the total number of transitions
of length two (i.e., 75)). Each text can thus be viewed
as a distribution defined over transition types. We
believe that considering all entity transitions may
uncover new patterns relevant for coherence assess-
ment.
We further refine our analysis by taking into ac-
count the salience of discourse entities. Centering
and other discourse theories conjecture that the way
an entity is introduced and mentioned depends on
its global role in a given discourse. Therefore, we
discriminate between transitions of salient entities
and the rest, collecting statistics for each group sep-
arately. We identify salient entities based on their
143
\x0cS
S
S
O
S
X
S

O
S
O
O
O
X
O

X
S
X
O
X
X
X


S

O

X


d1 0 0 0 .03 0 0 0 .02 .07 0 0 .12 .02 .02 .05 .25
d2 0 0 0 .02 0 .07 0 .02 0 0 .06 .04 0 0 0 .36
d3 .02 0 0 .03 0 0 0 .06 0 0 0 .05 .03 .07 .07 .29
Table 3: Example of a feature-vector document rep-
resentation using all transitions of length two given
syntactic categories: S, O, X, and .
frequency,1 following the widely accepted view that
the occurrence frequency of an entity correlates with
its discourse prominence (Morris and Hirst, 1991;
Grosz et al., 1995).
Ranking We view coherence assessment as a
ranking learning problem. The ranker takes as input
a set of alternative renderings of the same document
and ranks them based on their degree of local coher-
ence. Examples of such renderings include a set of
different sentence orderings of the same text and a
set of summaries produced by different systems for
the same document. Ranking is more suitable than
classification for our purposes since in text gener-
ation, a system needs a scoring function to com-
pare among alternative renderings. Furthermore, it
is clear that coherence assessment is not a categori-
cal decision but a graded one: there is often no single
coherent rendering of a given text but many different
possibilities that can be partially ordered.
As explained previously, coherence constraints
are modeled in the grid representation implicitly by
entity transition sequences. To employ a machine
learning algorithm to our problem, we encode tran-
sition sequences explicitly using a standard feature
vector notation. Each grid rendering j of a docu-
ment di is represented by a feature vector (xi j) =
(p1(xi j), p2(xi j),..., pm(xi j)), where m is the num-
ber of all predefined entity transitions, and pt(xi j)
the probability of transition t in grid xi j. Note that
considerable latitude is available when specifying
the transition types to be included in a feature vec-
tor. These can be all transitions of a given length
(e.g., two or three) or the most frequent transitions
within a document collection. An example of a fea-
ture space with transitions of length two is illustrated
in Table 3.
The training set consists of ordered pairs of ren-
derings (xi j,xik), where xi j and xik are renderings
1The frequency threshold is empirically determined on the
development set. See Section 5 for further discussion.
of the same document di, and xi j exhibits a higher
degree of coherence than xik. Without loss of gen-
erality, we assume j > k. The goal of the training
procedure is to find a parameter vector ~
w that yields
a ranking score function ~
w  (xi j), which mini-
mizes the number of violations of pairwise rankings
provided in the training set. Thus, the ideal ~
w would
satisfy the condition ~
w((xi j)(xik)) > 0  j,i,k
such that j > k. The problem is typically treated as
a Support Vector Machine constraint optimization
problem, and can be solved using the search tech-
nique described in Joachims (2002a). This approach
has been shown to be highly effective in various
tasks ranging from collaborative filtering (Joachims,
2002a) to parsing (Toutanova et al., 2004).
In our ranking experiments, we use Joachims
(2002a) SVMlight package for training and testing
with all parameters set to their default values.
4 Evaluation Set-Up
In this section we describe two evaluation tasks that
assess the merits of the coherence modeling frame-
work introduced above. We also give details regard-
ing our data collection, and parameter estimation.
Finally, we introduce the baseline method used for
comparison with our approach.
4.1 Text Ordering
Text structuring algorithms (Lapata, 2003; Barzi-
lay and Lee, 2004; Karamanis et al., 2004)
are commonly evaluated by their performance at
information-ordering. The task concerns determin-
ing a sequence in which to present a pre-selected set
of information-bearing items; this is an essential step
in concept-to-text generation, multi-document sum-
marization, and other text-synthesis problems. Since
local coherence is a key property of any well-formed
text, our model can be used to rank alternative sen-
tence orderings. We do not assume that local coher-
ence is sufficient to uniquely determine the best or-
dering  other constraints clearly play a role here.
However, we expect that the accuracy of a coherence
model is reflected in its performance in the ordering
task.
Data To acquire a large collection for training
and testing, we create synthetic data, wherein the
candidate set consists of a source document and per-
mutations of its sentences. This framework for data
acquisition is widely used in evaluation of ordering
algorithms as it enables large scale automatic evalu-
144
\x0cation. The underlying assumption is that the orig-
inal sentence order in the source document must
be coherent, and so we should prefer models that
rank it higher than other permutations. Since we do
not know the relative quality of different permuta-
tions, our corpus includes only pairwise rankings
that comprise the original document and one of its
permutations. Given k original documents, each with
n randomly generated permutations, we obtain k  n
(trivially) annotated pairwise rankings for training
and testing.
Using the technique described above, we col-
lected data in two different genres: newspaper ar-
ticles and accident reports written by government
officials. The first collection consists of Associated
Press articles from the North American News Cor-
pus on the topic of natural disasters. The second in-
cludes narratives from the National Transportation
Safety Boards database2. Both sets have documents
of comparable length  the average number of sen-
tences is 10.4 and 11.5, respectively. For each set, we
used 100 source articles with 20 randomly generated
permutations for training. The same number of pair-
wise rankings (i.e., 2000) was used for testing. We
held out 10 documents (i.e., 200 pairwise rankings)
from the training data for development purposes.
4.2 Summary Evaluation
We further test the ability of our method to assess
coherence by comparing model induced rankings
against rankings elicited by human judges. Admit-
tedly, the information ordering task only partially
approximates degrees of coherence violation using
different sentence permutations of a source docu-
ment. A stricter evaluation exercise concerns the as-
sessment of texts with naturally occurring coherence
violations as perceived by human readers. A rep-
resentative example of such texts are automatically
generated summaries which often contain sentences
taken out of context and thus display problems with
respect to local coherence (e.g., dangling anaphors,
thematically unrelated sentences). A model that ex-
hibits high agreement with human judges not only
accurately captures the coherence properties of the
summaries in question, but ultimately holds promise
for the automatic evaluation of machine-generated
texts. Existing automatic evaluation measures such
as BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) and ROUGE (Lin
2The collections are available from http://www.csail.
mit.edu/regina/coherence/.
and Hovy, 2003), are not designed for the coherence
assessment task, since they focus on content similar-
ity between system output and reference texts.
Data Our evaluation was based on materi-
als from the Document Understanding Conference
(DUC, 2003), which include multi-document sum-
maries produced by human writers and by automatic
summarization systems. In order to learn a rank-
ing, we require a set of summaries, each of which
have been rated in terms of coherence. We therefore
elicited judgments from human subjects.3 We ran-
domly selected 16 input document clusters and five
systems that had produced summaries for these sets,
along with summaries composed by several humans.
To ensure that we do not tune a model to a particu-
lar system, we used the output summaries of distinct
systems for training and testing. Our set of train-
ing materials contained 4  16 summaries (average
length 4.8), yielding 4
2
\x01
16 = 96 pairwise rankings.
In a similar fashion, we obtained 32 pairwise rank-
ings for the test set. Six documents from the training
data were used as a development set.
Coherence ratings were obtained during an elic-
itation study by 177 unpaid volunteers, all native
speakers of English. The study was conducted re-
motely over the Internet. Participants first saw a set
of instructions that explained the task, and defined
the notion of coherence using multiple examples.
The summaries were randomized in lists following a
Latin square design ensuring that no two summaries
in a given list were generated from the same docu-
ment cluster. Participants were asked to use a seven
point scale to rate how coherent the summaries were
without having seen the source texts. The ratings
(approximately 23 per summary) given by our sub-
jects were averaged to provide a rating between 1
and 7 for each summary.
The reliability of the collected judgments is cru-
cial for our analysis; we therefore performed sev-
eral tests to validate the quality of the annota-
tions. First, we measured how well humans agree
in their coherence assessment. We employed leave-
one-out resampling4 (Weiss and Kulikowski, 1991),
by correlating the data obtained from each par-
ticipant with the mean coherence ratings obtained
from all other participants. The inter-subject agree-
3The ratings are available from http://homepages.inf.
ed.ac.uk/mlap/coherence/.
4We cannot apply the commonly used Kappa statistic for
measuring agreement since it is appropriate for nominal scales,
whereas our summaries are rated on an ordinal scale.
145
\x0cment was r = .768. Second, we examined the ef-
fect of different types of summaries (human- vs.
machine-generated.) An ANOVA revealed a reliable
effect of summary type: F(1;15) = 20.38, p < 0.01
indicating that human summaries are perceived as
significantly more coherent than system-generated
ones. Finally, the judgments of our participants ex-
hibit a significant correlation with DUC evaluations
(r = .41, p < 0.01).
4.3 Parameter Estimation
Our model has two free parameters: the frequency
threshold used to identify salient entities and the
length of the transition sequence. These parameters
were tuned separately for each data set on the corre-
sponding held-out development set. For our ordering
and summarization experiments, optimal salience-
based models were obtained for entities with fre-
quency  2. The optimal transition length was  3
for ordering and  2 for summarization.
4.4 Baseline
We compare our algorithm against the coherence
model proposed by Foltz et al. (1998) which mea-
sures coherence as a function of semantic related-
ness between adjacent sentences. Semantic related-
ness is computed automatically using Latent Se-
mantic Analysis (LSA, Landauer and Dumais 1997)
from raw text without employing syntactic or other
annotations. This model is a good point of compari-
son for several reasons: (a) it is fully automatic, (b) it
is a not a straw-man baseline; it correlates reliably
with human judgments and has been used to analyze
discourse structure, and (c) it models an aspect of
coherence which is orthogonal to ours (their model
is lexicalized).
Following Foltz et al. (1998) we constructed
vector-based representations for individual words
from a lemmatized version of the North American
News Text Corpus5 (350 million words) using a
term-document matrix. We used singular value de-
composition to reduce the semantic space to 100 di-
mensions obtaining thus a space similar to LSA. We
represented the meaning of a sentence as a vector
by taking the mean of the vectors of its words. The
similarity between two sentences was determined by
measuring the cosine of their means. An overall text
coherence measure was obtained by averaging the
cosines for all pairs of adjacent sentences.
5Our selection of this corpus was motivated by its similarity
to the DUC corpus which primarily consists of news stories.
In sum, each text was represented by a single
feature, its sentence-to-sentence semantic similar-
ity. During training, the ranker learns an appropriate
threshold value for this feature.
4.5 Evaluation Metric
Model performance was assessed in the same way
for information ordering and summary evaluation.
Given a set of pairwise rankings, we measure accu-
racy as the ratio of correct predictions made by the
model over the size of the test set. In this setup, ran-
dom prediction results in an accuracy of 50%.
5 Results
The evaluation of our coherence model was driven
by two questions: (1) How does the proposed model
compare to existing methods for coherence assess-
ment that make use of distinct representations?
(2) What is the contribution of linguistic knowledge
to the models performance? Table 4 summarizes the
accuracy of various configurations of our model for
the ordering and coherence assessment tasks.
We first compared a linguistically rich grid model
that incorporates coreference resolution, expressive
syntactic information, and a salience-based feature
space (Coreference+Syntax+Salience) against the
LSA baseline (LSA). As can be seen in Table 4, the
grid model outperforms the baseline in both ordering
and summary evaluation tasks, by a wide margin.
We conjecture that this difference in performance
stems from the ability of our model to discriminate
between various patterns of local sentence transi-
tions. In contrast, the baseline model only measures
the degree of overlap across successive sentences,
without taking into account the properties of the en-
tities that contribute to the overlap. Not surprisingly,
the difference between the two methods is more pro-
nounced for the second task  summary evaluation.
Manual inspection of our summary corpus revealed
that low-quality summaries often contain repetitive
information. In such cases, simply knowing about
high cross-sentential overlap is not sufficient to dis-
tinguish a repetitive summary from a well-formed
one.
In order to investigate the contribution of linguis-
tic knowledge on model performance we compared
the full model introduced above against models us-
ing more impoverished representations. We focused
on three sources of linguistic knowledge  syntax,
coreference resolution, and salience  which play
146
\x0cModel Ordering (Set1) Ordering (Set2) Summarization
Coreference+Syntax+Salience 87.3 90.4 68.8
Coreference+Salience 86.9 88.3 62.5
Syntax+Salience 83.4 89.7 81.3
Coreference+Syntax 76.5 88.8 75.0
LSA 72.1 72.1 25.0
Table 4: Ranking accuracy measured as the fraction of correct pairwise rankings in the test set.
a prominent role in Centering analyses of discourse
coherence. An additional motivation for our study is
exploration of the trade-off between robustness and
richness of linguistic annotations. NLP tools are typ-
ically trained on human-authored texts, and may de-
teriorate in performance when applied to automati-
cally generated texts with coherence violations.
Syntax To evaluate the effect of syntactic
knowledge, we eliminated the identification of
grammatical relations from our grid computation
and recorded solely whether an entity is present or
absent in a sentence. This leaves only the coref-
erence and salience information in the model, and
the results are shown in Table 4 under (Corefer-
ence+Salience). The omission of syntactic informa-
tion causes a uniform drop in performance on both
tasks, which confirms its importance for coherence
analysis.
Coreference To measure the effect of fully-
fledged coreference resolution, we constructed en-
tity classes simply by clustering nouns on the ba-
sis of their identity. In other words, each noun in a
text corresponds to a different entity in a grid, and
two nouns are considered coreferent only if they
are identical. The performance of the model (Syn-
tax+Salience) is shown in the third row of Table 4.
While coreference resolution improved model
performance in ordering, it caused a decrease in ac-
curacy in summary evaluation. This drop in per-
formance can be attributed to two factors related
to the nature of our corpus  machine-generated
texts. First, an automatic coreference resolution tool
expectedly decreases in accuracy because it was
trained on well-formed human-authored texts. Sec-
ond, automatic summarization systems do not use
anaphoric expressions as often as humans do. There-
fore, a simple entity clustering method is more suit-
able for automatic summaries.
Salience Finally, we evaluate the contribution
of salience information by comparing our orig-
inal model (Coreference+Syntax+Salience) which
accounts separately for patterns of salient and
non-salient entities against a model that does not
attempt to discriminate between them (Corefer-
ence+Syntax). Our results on the ordering task indi-
cate that models that take salience information into
account consistently outperform models that do not.
The effect of salience is less pronounced for the
summarization task when it is combined with coref-
erence information (Coreference + Salience). This is
expected, since accurate identification of coreferring
entities is prerequisite to deriving accurate salience
models. However, as explained above, our automatic
coreference tool introduces substantial noise in our
representation. Once this noise is removed (see Syn-
tax+Salience), the salience model has a clear advan-
tage over the other models.
6 Discussion and Conclusions
In this paper we proposed a novel framework for
representing and measuring text coherence. Central
to this framework is the entity grid representation
of discourse which we argue captures important pat-
terns of sentence transitions. We re-conceptualize
coherence assessment as a ranking task and show
that our entity-based representation is well suited for
learning an appropriate ranking function; we achieve
good performance on text ordering and summary co-
herence evaluation.
On the linguistic side, our results yield empirical
support to some of Centering Theorys main claims.
We show that coherent texts are characterized by
transitions with particular properties which do not
hold for all discourses. Our work, however, not only
validates these findings, but also quantitatively mea-
sures the predictive power of various linguistic fea-
tures for the task of coherence assessment.
An important future direction lies in augmenting
our entity-based model with lexico-semantic knowl-
edge. One way to achieve this goal is to cluster enti-
ties based on their semantic relatedness, thereby cre-
147
\x0cating a grid representation over lexical chains (Mor-
ris and Hirst, 1991). An entirely different approach
is to develop fully lexicalized models, akin to tra-
ditional language models. Cache language mod-
els (Kuhn and Mori, 1990) seem particularly promis-
ing in this context.
In the discourse literature, entity-based theories
are primarily applied at the level of local coherence,
while relational models, such as Rhetorical Structure
Theory (Mann and Thomson, 1988; Marcu, 2000),
are used to model the global structure of discourse.
We plan to investigate how to combine the two for
improved prediction on both local and global levels,
with the ultimate goal of handling longer texts.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge the support of the National Science
Foundation (Barzilay; CAREER grant IIS-0448168 and grant
IIS-0415865) and EPSRC (Lapata; grant GR/T04540/01).
We are grateful to Claire Cardie and Vincent Ng for providing
us the results of their system on our data. Thanks to Eli Barzilay,
Eugene Charniak, Michael Elhadad, Noemie Elhadad, Frank
Keller, Alex Lascarides, Igor Malioutov, Smaranda Muresan,
Martin Rinard, Kevin Simler, Caroline Sporleder, Chao Wang,
Bonnie Webber and three anonymous reviewers for helpful
comments and suggestions. Any opinions, findings, and con-
clusions or recommendations expressed above are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Science Foundation or EPSRC.
References
N. Asher, A. Lascarides. 2003. Logics of Conversation.
Cambridge University Press.
R. Barzilay, L. Lee. 2004. Catching the drift: Probabilis-
tic content models, with applications to generation and
summarization. In Proceedings of HLT-NAACL, 113
120.
M. Collins. 1997. Three generative, lexicalised mod-
els for statistical parsing. In Proceedings of the
ACL/EACL, 1623.
P. W. Foltz, W. Kintsch, T. K. Landauer. 1998. Textual
coherence using latent semantic analysis. Discourse
Processes, 25(2&3):285307.
B. Grosz, A. K. Joshi, S. Weinstein. 1995. Centering:
A framework for modeling the local coherence of dis-
course. Computational Linguistics, 21(2):203225.
L. Hasler. 2004. An investigation into the use of cen-
tering transitions for summarisation. In Proceedings
of the 7th Annual CLUK Research Colloquium, 100
107, University of Birmingham.
T. Joachims. 2002a. Optimizing search engines using
clickthrough data. In Proceesings of KDD, 133142.
N. Karamanis, M. Poesio, C. Mellish, J. Oberlander.
2004. Evaluating centering-based metrics of coher-
ence for text structuring using a reliably annotated cor-
pus. In Proceedings of the ACL, 391398.
R. Kibble, R. Power. 2004. Optimising referential co-
herence in text generation. Computational Linguistics,
30(4):401416.
R. Kuhn, R. D. Mori. 1990. A cache-based natural lan-
guage model for speech recognition. IEEE Transac-
tions on PAMI, 12(6):570583.
T. K. Landauer, S. T. Dumais. 1997. A solution to Platos
problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of ac-
quisition, induction and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104(2):211240.
M. Lapata. 2003. Probabilistic text structuring: Exper-
iments with sentence ordering. In Proceedings of the
ACL, 545552.
C.-Y. Lin, E. H. Hovy. 2003. Automatic evaluation of
summaries using n-gram co-occurrence statistics. In
Proceedings of HLT-NAACL, 7178.
W. C. Mann, S. A. Thomson. 1988. Rhetorical structure
theory. Text, 8(3):243281.
D. Marcu. 2000. The Theory and Practice of Discourse
Parsing and Summarization. MIT Press.
E. Miltsakaki, K. Kukich. 2000. The role of centering
theorys rough-shift in the teaching and evaluation of
writing skills. In Proceedings of the ACL, 408415.
J. Morris, G. Hirst. 1991. Lexical cohesion computed by
thesaural relations as an indicator of the structure of
text. Computational Linguistics, 1(17):2143.
V. Ng, C. Cardie. 2002. Improving machine learning
approaches to coreference resolution. In Proceedings
of the ACL, 104111.
K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, W.-J. Zhu. 2002. Bleu:
a method for automatic evaluation of machine transla-
tion. In Proceedings of the ACL, 311318.
M. Poesio, R. Stevenson, B. D. Eugenio, J. Hitzeman.
2004. Centering: a parametric theory and its instan-
tiations. Computational Linguistics, 30(3):309363.
E. Reiter, R. Dale. 2000. Building Natural-Language
Generation Systems. Cambridge University Press.
D. Scott, C. S. de Souza. 1990. Getting the message
across in RST-based text generation. In R. Dale,
C. Mellish, M. Zock, eds., Current Research in Nat-
ural Language Generation, 4773. Academic Press.
M. Strube, U. Hahn. 1999. Functional centering 
grounding referential coherence in information struc-
ture. Computational Linguistics, 25(3):309344.
K. Toutanova, P. Markova, C. D. Manning. 2004. The
leaf projection path view of parse trees: Exploring
string kernels for HPSG parse selection. In Proceed-
ings of the EMNLP, 166173.
M. Walker, A. Joshi, E. Prince, eds. 1998. Centering
Theory in Discourse. Clarendon Press.
S. M. Weiss, C. A. Kulikowski. 1991. Computer Sys-
tems that Learn: Classification and Prediction Meth-
ods from, Statistics, Neural Nets, Machine Learning,
and Expert Systems. Morgan Kaufmann.
148
\x0c'