Text Generation from Keywords
Kiyotaka Uchimoto†
Satoshi Sekine‡
Hitoshi Isahara†
†
Communications Research Laboratory
2-2-2, Hikari-dai, Seika-cho, Soraku-gun,
Kyoto, 619-0289, Japan
{uchimoto,isahara}@crl.go.jp
‡
New York University
715 Broadway, 7th floor
New York, NY 10003, USA
sekine@cs.nyu.edu
Abstract
We describe a method for generating sentences
from “keywords” or “headwords”. This method
consists of two main parts, candidate-text con-
struction and evaluation. The construction part
generates text sentences in the form of depen-
dency trees by using complementary informa-
tion to replace information that is missing be-
cause of a “knowledge gap” and other missing
function words to generate natural text sen-
tences based on a particular monolingual cor-
pus. The evaluation part consists of a model
for generating an appropriate text when given
keywords. This model considers not only word
n-gram information, but also dependency infor-
mation between words. Furthermore, it consid-
ers both string information and morphological
information.
1 Introduction
Text generation is an important technique used
for applications like machine translation, sum-
marization, and human/computer dialogue. In
recent years, many corpora have become avail-
able, and have been used to generate natural
surface sentences. For example, corpora have
been used to generate sentences for language
model estimation in statistical machine trans-
lation. In such translation, given a source lan-
guage text, S, the translated text, T, in the
target language that maximizes the probabil-
ity P(T|S) is selected as the most appropri-
ate translation, Tbest, which is represented as
(Brown et al., 1990)
Tbest = argmaxT P(T |S)
= argmaxT (P(S|T ) × P(T )) . (1)
In this equation, P(S|T) represents the model
used to replace words or phrases in a source lan-
guage with those in the target language. It is
called a translation model. P(T) represents a
language model that is used to reorder trans-
lated words or phrases into a natural order in
the target language. The input of the language
model is a “bag of words,” and the goal of the
model is basically to reorder the words. At this
point, there is an assumption that natural sen-
tences can be generated by merely reordering
the words given by a translation model. To give
such a complete set of words, however, a trans-
lation model needs a large number of bilingual
corpora. If we could automatically complement
the words needed to generate natural sentences,
we would not have to collect the large number
of bilingual corpora required by a translation
model. In this paper, we assume that the role of
the translation model is not to give a complete
set of words that can be used to generate nat-
ural sentences, but to give a set of headwords
or center words that a speaker might want to
express, and describe a model that can provide
the complementary information needed to gen-
erate natural sentences by using a target lan-
guage corpus when given a set of headwords.
If we denote a set of headwords in a target
language as K, we can express Eq. (1) as
P(T |S) = P(K|S) × P(T |K). (2)
P(K|S) in this equation represents a model
that gives a set of headwords in the target lan-
guage when given a source-language text sen-
tence. P(T|K) represents a model that gener-
ates text sentence T when given a set of head-
words, K. We call the model represented by
P(T|K) a text-generation model. In this paper,
we describe a text-generation model and a gen-
eration system that uses the model. Given a set
of headwords or keywords, our system outputs
the text sentence that maximizes P(T|K) as an
appropriate text sentence, Tbest:
Tbest = argmaxT P(T |K)
= argmaxT (P(K|T ) × P(T )) . (3)
In this equation, we call the model represented
by P(K|T) a keyword-production model. This
equation is equal to Eq. (1) when a source-
text sentence is replaced with a set of key-
words. Therefore, this model can be regarded
as a model that translates keywords into text
sentences. The model represented by P(T) in
Eq. (3) is a language model used in statistical
machine translation. The n-gram model is the
most popular one used as a language model.
We assume that there is one extremely proba-
ble ordered set of morphemes and dependencies
between words that produce keywords, and we
express P(K|T) as
P(K|T) ≈ P(K, M, D|T)
= P(K|M, D, T) × P(D|M, T) × P(M|T). (4)
In this equation, M denotes an ordered set of
morphemes and D denotes an ordered set of de-
pendencies in a sentence. P(K|M, D, T) rep-
resents a keyword-production model. To es-
timate the models represented by P(D|M, T)
and P(M|T), we use a dependency model and
a morpheme model, respectively, for the depen-
dency analysis and morphological analysis.
Statistical machine translation and example-
based machine translation require numerous
high-quality bilingual corpora. Interlingual ma-
chine translation and transfer-based machine
translation require a parser with high precision.
Therefore, these approaches to translation are
not practical if we do not have enough bilingual
corpora or a good parser. This is especially so if
the source text-sentences are incomplete or have
errors like those often found in OCR and speech-
recognition output. In these cases, however, if
we translate headwords into words in the target
language and generate sentences from the trans-
lated words by using our method, we should be
able to generate natural sentences from which
we can grasp the meaning of the source-text sen-
tences.
The text-generation model represented by
P(T|K) in Eq. (2) can be applied to various
tasks besides machine translation.
• Sentence-generation support system
for people with aphasia: About 300,000
people are reported to suﬀer from aphasia
in Japan, and 40% of them can select only
a few words to describe a picture. If candi-
date sentences can be generated from these
few words, it would help these people com-
municate with their families and friends.
• Support system for second language
writing: Beginners writing in second lan-
guage usually ﬁned it easy to produce cen-
ter words or headwords, but often have dif-
ﬁculty generating complete sentences. If
several possible sentences could be gener-
ated from those words, it would help begin-
ners communicate with foreigners or study
second-language writing.
These are just two examples. We believe that
there are many other possible applications.
2 Overview of the Text-Generation
System
In this section, we give an overview of our sys-
tem for generating text sentences from given
keywords. As shown in Fig. 1, this system con-
sists of three parts: generation-rule acquisition,
candidate-text sentence construction, and eval-
uation.
Figure 1: Overview of the text-generation sys-
tem.
Given keywords, text sentences are generated
as follows.
1. During generation-rule acquisition, genera-
tion rules for each keyword are automati-
cally acquired.
2. Candidate-text sentences are constructed
during candidate-text construction by ap-
plying the rules acquired in the ﬁrst
step. Each candidate-text sentence is rep-
resented by a graph or dependency tree.
3. Candidate-text sentences are ranked ac-
cording to their scores assigned during eval-
uation. The scores are calculated as a
probability estimated by using a keyword-
production model and a language model
that are trained with a corpus.
4. The candidate-text sentence that maxi-
mizes the score or the candidate-text sen-
tences whose scores are over a threshold
are selected as output. The system can
also output candidate-text sentences that
are ranked within the top N sentences.
In this paper, we assume that the target lan-
guage is Japanese. We deﬁne a keyword as the
headword of a bunsetsu. A bunsetsu is a phrasal
unit that usually consists of several content and
function words. We deﬁne the headword of a
bunsetsu as the rightmost content word in the
bunsetsu, and we deﬁne a content word as a
word whose part-of-speech is a verb, adjective,
noun, demonstrative, adverb, conjunction, at-
tribute, interjection, or undeﬁned word. We
deﬁne the other words as function words. We
deﬁne formal nouns and auxiliary verbs “SURU
(do)” and “NARU (become)” as function words,
except when there are no other content words
in the same bunsetsu. Part-of-speech categories
follow those in the Kyoto University text corpus
(Version 3.0) (Kurohashi and Nagao, 1997), a
tagged corpus of the Mainichi newspaper.
Figure 2: Example of text generated from key-
words.
For example, given the set of keywords
“kanojo (she),” “ie (house),” and “iku (go),” as
shown in Fig. 2, our system retrieves sentences
including each word, and extracts each bunsetsu
that includes each word as a headword of the
bunsetsu. If there is no tagged corpus such
as the Kyoto University text corpus, each bun-
setsu can be extracted by using a morphological-
analysis system and a dependency-analysis sys-
tem such as JUMAN (Kurohashi and Nagao,
1999) and KNP (Kurohashi, 1998). Our system
then acquires generation rules as follows.
• “kanojo (she)→kanojo (she) no (of)”
• “kanojo (she)→kanojo (she) ga”
• “ie (house)→ie (house) ni (to)”
• “iku (go)→iku (go)”
• “iku (go)→itta (went)”
The system next generates candidate bunsetsus
for each keyword and candidate-text sentences
in the form of dependency trees, such as “Can-
didate 1” and “Candidate 2” in Fig. 2, with
the assumption that there are dependencies be-
tween keywords. Finally, the candidate-text
sentences are ranked by their scores, calculated
by a text-generation model, and transformed
into surface sentences.
In this paper, we focus on the keyword-
production model represented by Eq. (4) and
assume that our system outputs sentences in the
form of dependency trees.
3 Candidate-Text Construction
We automatically acquire generation rules from
a monolingual target corpus at the time of gen-
erating candidate-text sentences. Generation
rules are restricted to those that generate bun-
setsus, and the generated bunsetsus must in-
clude each input keyword as a headword in the
bunsetsu. We then generate candidate-text sen-
tences in the form of dependency trees by simply
combining the bunsetsus generated by the rules.
The simple combination of generated bunsetsus
may produce semantically or grammatically in-
appropriate candidate-text sentences, but our
goal in this work was to generate a variety of
text sentences rather than a few ﬁxed expres-
sions with high precision 1.
3.1 Generation-Rule Acquisition
Let us denote a set of keywords as KS and a
set of rules, each of which generates a bunsetsu
when given keyword k(∈KS), as Rk. We then
restrict rk(∈Rk) to those represented as
k → hkm∗
. (5)
In this rule, hk represents the head morpheme
whose word is equal to keyword k; m∗ repre-
sents zero, one, or a series of morphemes that
are connected to hk in the same bunsetsu. Here,
we deﬁne a morpheme as consisting of a word
and its morphological information or grammat-
ical attribute, such as part-of-speech, and we
deﬁne a head morpheme as consisting of a head-
word and its grammatical attribute. By apply-
ing these rules, we generate bunsetsus from in-
put keywords.
3.2 Construction of Dependency Trees
Given keywords K = k1k2 . . . kn, candidate bun-
setsus are generated by applying the generation
rules described in Section 3.1. Next, by as-
suming dependency relationships between the
bunsetsus, candidate dependency trees are con-
structed. Dependencies between the bunsetsus
are restricted in that they must have the follow-
ing characteristics of Japanese dependencies:
1
Note that 83.33% (3,973/4,768) of the headwords in
the newspaper articles appearing on January 17, 1995
were found in those appearing from January 1st to 16th.
However, only 21.82% (2,295/10,517) of the headword
dependencies in the newspaper articles appearing on
January 17th were found in those appearing from Jan-
uary 1st to 16th.
(i) Dependencies are directed from left to
right.
(ii) Dependencies do not cross.
(iii) All bunsetsus except the rightmost one de-
pend on only one other bunsetsu.
For example, when three keywords are given
and candidate bunsetsus including each keyword
are generated as b1, b2, and b3, the candidate de-
pendency trees are (b1 (b2 b3)) and ((b1 b2) b3)
if we do not reorder keywords, but 16 trees re-
sult if we consider the order of keywords to be
arbitrary.
4 Text-Generation Model
We next describe the model represented by Eq.
(4); that is, a keyword-production model, a
morpheme model that estimates how likely a
string is to be a morpheme, and a dependency
model. The goal of this model is to select
optimal sets of morphemes and dependencies
that can generate natural sentences. We imple-
mented these models within an maximum en-
tropy framework (Berger et al., 1996; Ristad,
1997; Ristad, 1998).
4.1 Keyword-Production Models
This section describes ﬁve keyword-production
models which are represented by P(K|M, D, T)
in Eq. (4). In these models, we deﬁne the set of
headwords whose frequency in the corpus is over
a certain threshold as a set of keywords, KS,
and we restrict the bunsetsus to those generated
by the generation rules represented in form (5).
We assume that all keywords are independent
and that ki corresponds to word wj(1 ≤ j ≤ m)
when text is given as a series of words w1 . . . wm.
1. trigram model
We assume that ki depends only on the two
anterior words wj−1 and wj−2.
P(K|M, D, T ) =
n

i=1
P(ki|wj−1, wj−2).(6)
2. posterior trigram model
We assume that ki depends only on the two
posterior words wj+1 and wj+2.
P(K|M, D, T ) =
n

i=1
P(ki|wj+1, wj+2).(7)
3. dependency bigram model
We assume that ki depends only on the two
rightmost words wl and wl−1 in the right-
most bunsetsu that modiﬁes the bunsetsu
including ki (see Fig. 3).
P(K|M, D, T ) =
n

i=1
P(ki|wl, wl−1). (8)
Figure 3: Relationship between keywords and
words in bunsetsus.
4. posterior dependency bigram model
We assume that ki depends only on the
headword, ws, and the word on its right,
ws+1, in the bunsetsu that is modiﬁed by
the bunsetsu including ki (see Fig. 3).
P(K|M, D, T ) =
n

i=1
P(ki|ws, ws+1). (9)
5. dependency trigram model
We assume that ki depends only on the two
rightmost words wl and wl−1 in the right-
most bunsetsu that modiﬁes the bunsetsu,
and on the two rightmost words wh and
wh−1 in the leftmost bunsetsu that modi-
ﬁes the bunsetsu including ki (see Fig. 3).
P(K|M, D, T) =
n

i=1
P(ki|wl, wl−1, wh, wh−1). (10)
4.2 Morpheme Model
Let us assume that there are l grammatical
attributes assigned to morphemes. We call a
model that estimates the likelihood that a given
string is a morpheme and has the grammatical
attribute j(1 ≤ j ≤ l) a morpheme model.
Let us also assume that morphemes in the or-
dered set of morphemes M depend on the pre-
ceding morphemes. We can then represent the
probability of M, given text T; namely, P(M|T)
in Eq. (4):
P(M|T ) =
n

i=1
P(mi|mi−1
1 , T ), (11)
where mi can be one of the grammatical at-
tributes assigned to each morpheme.
4.3 Dependency Model
Let us assume that dependencies di(1 ≤ i ≤ n)
in the ordered set of dependencies D are inde-
pendent. We can then represent P(D|M, T) in
Eq. (4) as
P(D|M, T ) =
n

i=1
P(di|M, T ). (12)
5 Evaluation
To evaluate our system we made 30 sets of
keywords, with three keywords in each set, as
shown in Table 1. A human subject selected
the sets from headwords that were found ten
Table 1: Input keywords and examples of sys-
tem output.
Input (Keywords) Ex. of system output
ロシア 連覇 達成 (ロシアで (連覇を 達成した))
世界 記録 変わる ((世界の 記録に) 変わる)
課題 実現 挑む ((課題の 実現に) 挑む)
チーム ともに 勝つ (チームで (ともに 勝った))
この 計画 決める
戦後 生活 支える ((戦後の 生活を) 支える)
大統領 会見 陳述 ((大統領の 会見の) 陳述)
容疑者 中国 逮捕 (容疑者は (中国で 逮捕された))
日本 五輪 開催
国 政策 発足 ((国の 政策が) 発足する)
課題 実現 向かう ((課題の 実現に) 向かう)
社会 働く 女性 ((社会に 働いている) 女性)
首相 政権 奪回 (首相が (政権を 奪回する))
提案 見直し 作る ((提案の 見直しを) 作る)
政権 発足 決まる (政権が (発足に 決まった))
香港 クルー 多い (香港は (クルーも 多いらしい))
大会 出場 勝つ
正月 旅行 急増 ((正月の 旅行も) 急増している)
民営化 反対 人 ((民営化に 反対している) 人)
昨年 政策 認める ((昨年の 政策を) 認めるべきだ)
米国 勝つ 明らかだ ((米国に 勝てば) 明らかになる)
住民 疑い 広がる ((住民の 疑いが) 広がる)
日本 中国 近い
外国人 加入 増加 ((外国人の 加入者が) 増加している)
五輪 選手権 獲得 ((五輪の 選手権を) 獲得する)
企業 撤廃 進める (企業が (撤廃を 進める))
将来 新進党 生まれる (将来は (新進党が 生まれるだろう))
昨年 記録 上回る ((昨年の 記録を) 上回る)
強い チーム 目指す
よい 仕事 ほしい
times or more in the newspaper articles on Jan-
uary 1st in the Kyoto University text corpus
(Version 3.0) without looking at the articles.
We evaluated each model by the percentage
of outputs that were subjectively judged as ap-
propriate by one of the authors. We used two
evaluation standards.
• Standard 1: If the dependency tree ranked
ﬁrst is semantically and grammatically ap-
propriate, it is judged as appropriate.
• Standard 2: If there is at least one depen-
dency tree that is ranked within the top
ten and is semantically and grammatically
appropriate, it is judged as appropriate.
We used headwords that were found ﬁve times
or more in the newspaper articles appearing
from January 1st to 16th in the Kyoto Univer-
sity text corpus and also found in those appear-
ing on January 1st as the set of headwords, KS.
For headwords that were not in KS, we added
their major part-of-speech categories to the set.
We trained our keyword-production models by
using 1,129 sentences (containing 10,201 head-
words) from newspaper articles appearing on
January 1st. We used a morpheme model and a
dependency model identical to those proposed
by Uchimoto et al. (Uchimoto et al., 2001; Uchi-
moto et al., 1999; Uchimoto et al., 2000b). To
train the models, we used 8,835 sentences from
newspaper articles appearing from January 1st
to 9th in 1995. Generation rules were acquired
from newspaper articles appearing from Jan-
uary 1st to 16th. The total number of sentences
was 18,435.
First, we evaluated the outputs generated
when the rightmost two keywords, such as “連
覇 and 達成,” on each line of Table 1 were input.
Table 2 shows the results. KM1 through KM5
stand for the ﬁve keyword-production models
described in Section 4.1, and MM and DM stand
for the morpheme and the dependency models,
respectively. The symbol + indicates a combi-
nation of models. In the models without MM,
DM, or both, P(M|T) and P(D|M, T) were as-
sumed to be 1. We carried out additional ex-
periments with models that considered both the
anterior and posterior words, such as the com-
bination of KM1 and KM2 or KM3 and KM4.
The results were at most 16/30 by standard 1
and 24/30 by standard 1.
Table 2: Results of subjective evaluation.
Model Standard 1 Standard 2
KM1 (trigram) 13/30 28/30
KM1 + MM 21/30 28/30
KM1 + DM 12/30 28/30
KM1 + MM + DM 26/30 28/30
KM2 (posterior trigram) 6/30 15/30
KM2 + MM 8/30 20/30
KM2 + DM 10/30 20/30
KM2 + MM + DM 9/30 25/30
KM3 (dependency bigram) 13/30 29/30
KM3 + MM 26/30 29/30
KM3 + DM 14/30 28/30
KM3 + MM + DM 27/30 29/30
KM4 (posterior dependency bigram) 10/30 18/30
KM4 + MM 9/30 26/30
KM4 + DM 9/30 22/30
KM4 + MM + DM 13/30 27/30
KM5 (dependency trigram) 12/30 26/30
KM5 + MM 17/30 28/30
KM5 + DM 12/30 27/30
KM5 + MM + DM 26/30 28/30
The models KM1+MM+DM,
KM3+MM+DM, and KM5+MM+DM
achieved the best results, as shown in Ta-
ble 2. For models KM1, KM3, and KM5, the
results with MM and DM were signiﬁcantly
better than those without MM and DM in
the evaluation by standard 1. We believe this
was because cases are more tightly connected
with verbs than with nouns, so models KM1,
KM3, and KM5, which learn the connection
between cases and verbs, can better rank the
candidate-text sentences that have a natural
connection between cases and verbs than other
candidates.
Next, we conducted experiments using the
30 sets of keywords shown in Table 1 as in-
puts. We used two keyword-production mod-
els: model KM3+MM+DM, which achieved
the best results in the ﬁrst experiment, and
model KM5+MM+DM, which considers the
richest information. We assumed that the in-
put keyword order was appropriate and did not
reorder the keywords. The results for both
models were the same: 19/30 in the evalu-
ation by standard 1 and 24/30 in the eval-
uation by standard 2. The right column of
Table 1 shows examples of the system out-
put. For example, for the input “将来 (syourai,
in the future), 新進党 (shin-shin-tou, the New
Frontier Party), and 生まれる (umareru, to
be born)”, the dependency tree “(将来は
[syourai wa] (新進党が [shin-shin-tou ga] 生
まれるだろう [umareru darou]))” (“The New
Frontier Party will be born in the future.”)
was generated. This output was automati-
cally complemented by the appropriate modal-
ity “だろう” (darou, will), which agrees with
the word “将来” (syourai, in the future), as
well as by post-positional particles such as “
は” (wa, case marker) and “が” (ga). For
the input “外国人 (gaikoku-jin, a foreigner), 加
入 (kanyuu, to join), and 増加 (zouka, to in-
crease)”, the dependency tree “(( 外国人の
[gaikokujin no] 加入者が [kanyuu sya ga]) 増
加している [zouka shite iru] )” (“Foreigner
members are increasing in number.”) was
generated. This output was complemented
not only by the modality expression “して
いる” (shite iru, the progressive form) and
post-positional particles such as “の” (no, of)
and “が” (ga), but also by the suﬃx “者”
(sya, person), and a compound noun “加入者”
(kanyuu sya, member) was generated naturally.
In six cases, though, we did not obtain appro-
priate outputs because the candidate-text sen-
tences were not appropriately ranked. Improv-
ing the back-oﬀ ability of the model by using
classiﬁed words or synonyms as features should
enable us to rank sentences more appropriately.
6 Related Work
Many statistical generation methods have been
proposed. In this section, we describe the diﬀer-
ences between our method and several previous
methods.
Japanese words are often followed by post-
positional particles, such as “ga” and “wo”,
to indicate the subject and object of a sen-
tence. There are no corresponding words in
English. Instead, English words are preceded
by articles, “the” and “a,” to distinguish def-
inite and indeﬁnite nouns, and so on, and in
this case there are no corresponding words in
Japanese. Knight et al. proposed a way to
compensate for missing information caused by
a lack of language-dependent knowledge, or a
“knowledge gap” (Knight and Hatzivassiloglou,
1995; Langkilde and Knight, 1998a; Langkilde
and Knight, 1998b). They use semantic expres-
sions as input, whereas we use keywords. Also,
they construct candidate-text sentences or word
lattices by applying rules, and apply their lan-
guage model, an n-gram model, to select the
most appropriate surface text. While we can-
not use their rules to generate candidate-text
sentences when given keywords, we can apply
their language model to our system to generate
surface-text sentences from candidate-text sen-
tences in the form of dependency trees. We can
also apply the formalism proposed by Langkilde
(Langkilde, 2000) to express the candidate-text
sentences.
Bangalore and Rambow proposed a method
to generate candidate-text sentences in the form
of trees (Bangalore and Rambow, 2000). They
consider dependency information when deriving
trees by using XTAG grammar, but they as-
sume that the input contains dependency infor-
mation. Our system generates candidate-text
sentences without relying on dependency infor-
mation in the input, and our model estimates
the dependencies between keywords.
Ratnaparkhi proposed models to generate
text from semantic attributes (Ratnaparkhi,
2000). The input of these models is semantic
attributes. His models are similar to ours if the
semantic attributes are replaced with keywords.
However, his models need a training corpus in
which certain words are replaced with seman-
tic attributes. Although our model also needs
a training corpus, the corpus can be automati-
cally created by using a morphological analyzer
and a dependency analyzer, both of which are
readily available.
Humphreys et al. proposed using mod-
els developed for sentence-structure analysis to
rank candidate-text sentences (Humphreys et
al., 2001). As well as models developed for
sentence-structure analysis, we also use those
developed for morphological analysis and found
that these models contribute to the generation
of appropriate text.
Berger and Laﬀerty proposed a language
model for information retrieval (Berger and Laf-
ferty, 1999). Their concept is similar to that of
our model, which can be regarded as a model
that translates keywords into text, while their
model can be regarded as one that translates
query words into documents. However, the pur-
pose of their model is diﬀerent: their goal is to
retrieve text that already exists while ours is to
generate new text.
7 Conclusion
We have described a method for generating sen-
tences from ”keywords” or “headwords”. This
method consists of two main parts, candidate-
text construction and evaluation.
1. The construction part generates text sen-
tences in the form of dependency trees by
providing complementary information to
replace that missing due to a “knowledge
gap” and other missing function words, and
thus generates natural text sentences based
on a particular monolingual corpus.
2. The evaluation part consists of a model
for generating an appropriate text sentence
when given keywords. This model consid-
ers the dependency information between
words as well as word n-gram informa-
tion. Furthermore, the model considers
both string and morphological information.
If a language model, such as a word n-gram
model, is applied to the generated-text sen-
tences in the form of dependency trees, an
appropriate surface-text sentence is generated.
The word-order model proposed by Uchimoto et
al. can also generate surface text in a natural
order (Uchimoto et al., 2000a).
There are several possible directions for our
future research. In particular,
• We would like to expand the generation
rules. We restricted the generation rules
automatically acquired from a corpus to
those that generate a bunsetsu. To gener-
ate a greater variety of candidate-text sen-
tences, we would like to expand the rules
that can generate a dependency tree. Ex-
pansion would lead to complementing with
content words as well as function words.
We also would like to prepare default rules
or to classify words into several classes
when no sentences including the keywords
are found in the target corpus.
• Some of the N-best text sentences gener-
ated by our system are semantically and
grammatically unnatural. To remove such
sentences from among the candidate-text
sentences, we must enhance our model so
that it can consider more information, such
as classiﬁed words or those in a thesaurus.
• We restricted keywords to the headwords or
rightmost content words in the bunsetsus.
We would like to expand the deﬁnition of
keywords to other content words and to
synonyms of the keywords.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Mainichi Newspapers for permis-
sion to use their data. We also thank Kimiko
Ohta, Hiroko Inui, Takehito Utsuro, Man-
abu Okumura, Akira Ushioda, Jun’ichi Tsujii,
Kiyosi Yasuda, and Masahisa Ohta for their
beneﬁcial comments during the progress of this
work.
References
S. Bangalore and O. Rambow. 2000. Exploiting a Probabilis-
tic Hierarchical Model for Generation. In Proceedings of
the COLING, pages 42–48.
A. Berger and J. Laﬀerty. 1999. Information Retrieval as
Statistical Translation. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGIR,
pages 222–229.
A. L. Berger, S. A. Della Pietra, and V. J. Della Pietra. 1996.
A Maximum Entropy Approach to Natural Language Pro-
cessing. Computational Linguistics, 22(1):39–71.
P. F. Brown, J. Cocke, S. A. Della Pietra, V. J. Della Pietra,
F. Jelinek, J. D. Laﬀerty, R. L. Mercer, and P. S. Roossin.
1990. A Statistical Approach to Machine Translation.
Computational Linguistics, 16(2):79–85.
K. Humphreys, M. Calcagno, and D. Weise. 2001. Reusing a
Statistical Language Model for Generation. In Proceedings
of the EWNLG.
K. Knight and V. Hatzivassiloglou. 1995. Two-Level, Many-
Paths Generation. In Proceedings of the ACL, pages 252–
260.
S. Kurohashi and M. Nagao. 1997. Building a Japanese
Parsed Corpus while Improving the Parsing System. In
Proceedings of the NLPRS, pages 451–456.
S. Kurohashi and M. Nagao, 1999. Japanese Morphological
Analysis System JUMAN Version 3.61. Department of
Informatics, Kyoto University.
S. Kurohashi, 1998. Japanese Dependency/Case Structure
Analyzer KNP Version 2.0b6. Department of Informatics,
Kyoto University.
I. Langkilde and K. Knight. 1998a. Generation that Exploits
Corpus-Based Statistical Knowledge. In Proceedings of the
COLING-ACL, pages 704–710.
I. Langkilde and K. Knight. 1998b. The Practical Value of
N-grams in Generation. In Proceedings of the INLG.
I. Langkilde. 2000. Forest-Based Statistical Sentence Gener-
ation. In Proceedings of the NAACL, pages 170–177.
A. Ratnaparkhi. 2000. Trainable Methods for Surface Natu-
ral Language Generation. In Proceedings of the NAACL,
pages 194–201.
E. S. Ristad. 1997. Maximum Entropy Modeling for Natural
Language. ACL/EACL Tutorial Program, Madrid.
E. S. Ristad. 1998. Maximum Entropy Modeling Toolkit,
Release 1.6 beta. http://www.mnemonic.com/software/
memt.
K. Uchimoto, S. Sekine, and H. Isahara. 1999. Japanese De-
pendency Structure Analysis Based on Maximum Entropy
Models. In Proceedings of the EACL, pages 196–203.
K. Uchimoto, M. Murata, Q. Ma, S. Sekine, and H. Isahara.
2000a. Word Order Acquisition from Corpora. In Proceed-
ings of the COLING, pages 871–877.
K. Uchimoto, M. Murata, S. Sekine, and H. Isahara. 2000b.
Dependency Model Using Posterior Context. In Proceed-
ings of the IWPT, pages 321–322.
K. Uchimoto, S. Sekine, and H. Isahara. 2001. The Unknown
Word Problem: a Morphological Analysis of Japanese Us-
ing Maximum Entropy Aided by a Dictionary. In Proceed-
ings of the EMNLP, pages 91–99.
