b'Some Experiments in Mining Named Entity Transliteration Pairs from
Comparable Corpora
K Saravanan
Microsoft Research India
Bangalore, India
v-sarak@microsoft.com
A Kumaran
Microsoft Research India
Bangalore, India
kumarana@microsoft.com
Abstract
Parallel Named Entity pairs are important
resources in several NLP tasks, such as,
CLIR and MT systems. Further, such pairs
may also be used for training transliteration
systems, if they are transliterations of each
other. In this paper, we profile the perfor-
mance of a mining methodology in mining
parallel named entity transliteration pairs in
English and an Indian language, Tamil,
leveraging linguistic tools in English, and
article-aligned comparable corpora in the
two languages. We adopt a methodology
parallel to that of [Klementiev and Roth,
2006], but we focus instead on mining
parallel named entity transliteration pairs,
using a well-trained linear classifier to
identify transliteration pairs. We profile
the performance at several operating para-
meters of our algorithm and present the
results that show the potential of the
approach in mining transliterations pairs; in
addition, we uncover a host of issues that
need to be resolved, for effective mining of
parallel named entity transliteration pairs.
1 Introduction & Motivation
Parallel Named Entity (NE) pairs are important
resources in several NLP tasks, from supporting
Cross-Lingual Information Retrieval (CLIR)
systems, to improving Machine Translation (MT)
systems. In addition, such pairs may also be used
for developing transliteration systems, if they are
transliterations of each other. Transliteration of a
name, for the purpose of this work, is defined as its
transcription in a different language, preserving the
phonetics, perhaps in a different orthography
[Knight and Graehl, 1997] 1
. While traditional
transliteration systems have relied on hand-crafted
linguistic rules, more recently, statistical machine
learning techniques have been shown to be effec-
tive in transliteration tasks [Jung et al., 2000] [Ab-
dulJaleel and Larkey, 2003] [Virga and Kudhan-
pur , 2003] [Haizhou et al., 2004]. However, such
data-driven approaches require significant amounts
of training data, namely pairs of names in two dif-
ferent languages, possibly in different orthography,
referred to as transliteration pairs, which are not
readily available in many resource-poor languages.
It is important to note at this point, that NEs are
found typically in news corpora in any given
language. In addition, news articles covering the
same event in two different languages may reason-
ably be expected to contain the same NEs in the
respective languages. The perpetual availability of
news corpora in the worlds languages, points to
the promise of mining transliteration pairs
endlessly, provided an effective identification of
such NEs in specific languages and pairing them
appropriately, could be devised.
Recently, [Klementiev and Roth, 2006] outlined an
approach by leveraging the availability of article-
aligned news corpora between English and Rus-
sian, and tools in English, for discovering translite-
ration pairs between the two languages, and pro-
gressively refining the discovery process. In this
paper, we adopt their basic methodology, but we
focus on 3 different issues:
1
London rewritten as  in Tamil, or  in Arabic (both
pronounced as London), are considered as transliterations, but
not the rewriting of New Delhi as   (puthu thilli) in
Tamil.
26
The 2nd International Workshop On "Cross Lingual Information Access"
Addressing the Information Need of Multilingual Societies, 2008
\x0c1. mining comparable corpora for NE pairs, leve-
raging a well trained classifier,
2. calibrating the performance of this mining
framework, systematically under different pa-
rameters for mining, and,
3. uncovering further research issues in mining NE
pairs between English and an Indian language,
Tamil.
While our analysis points to a promising approach
for mining transliteration pairs, it also uncovers
several issues that may need to be resolved, to
make this process highly effective. As in [Klemen-
tiev and Roth, 2006] no language specific know-
ledge was used to refine our mining process, mak-
ing the approach broadly applicable.
2 Transliteration Pairs Discovery
In this section, we outline briefly the methodology
presented in [Klementiev and Roth, 2006], and
refer interested readers to the source for details.
They present a methodology to automatically
discover parallel NE transliteration pairs between
English and Russian, leveraging the availability of
a good-quality Named Entity Recognizer (NER) in
English, and article-aligned bilingual comparable
corpora, in English and Russian. The key idea of
their approach is to extract all NEs in English, and
identify a set of potential transliteration pairs in
Russian for these NEs using a simple classifier
trained on a small seed corpus, and re-ranking the
identified pairs using the similarity between the
frequency distributions of the NEs in the
comparable corpora. Once re-ranked, the
candidate pairs, whose scores are above a threshold
are used to re-train the classifier, and the process is
repeated to make the discovery process more
effective.
To discriminate transliteration pairs from other
content words, a simple perceptron-based linear
classifier, which is trained on n-gram features
extracted from a small seed list of NE pairs, is
employed leveraging the fact that transliteration
relies on approximately monotonic alignment
between the names in two languages. The
potential transliteration pairs identified by this
classifier are subsequently re-ranked using a
Discrete Fourier Transform based similarity
metric, computed based on the frequency of words
of the candidate pair, found in the article-aligned
comparable corpora. For the frequency analysis,
equivalence classes of the words are formed, using
a common prefix of 5 characters, to account for the
rich morphology of Russian language. The
representative prefix of each of the classes are used
for classification.
Finally, the high scoring pairs of words are used to
re-train the perceptron-based linear classifier, to
improve the quality of the subsequent rounds. The
quality of the extracted NE pairs is shown to
improve, demonstrating viability of such an
approach for successful discovery of NE pairs
between English and Russian.
3 Adoption for Transliteration Pairs
Mining
We adopt the basic methodology presented in
[Klementiev and Roth, 2006], but we focus on
three specific issues described in the introduction.
3.1 Mining of Transliteration Pairs
We start with comparable corpora in English and
Tamil, similar in size to that used in [Klementiev
and Roth, 2006], and using the English side of this
corpora, first, we extract all the NEs that occur
more than a given threshold parameter, FE, using a
standard NER tool. The higher the threshold is,
the more will be the evidence for legitimate transli-
teration pairs, in the comparable corpora, which
may be captured by the mining methodology. The
extracted list of NEs provides the set of NEs in
English, for which we mine for transliteration pairs
from the Tamil side of the comparable corpora.
We need to identify all NEs in the Tamil side of
the corpora, in order to appropriately pair-up with
English NEs. However, given that there is no pub-
licly available NER tool in Tamil (as the case may
be in many resource-poor languages) we start with
an assumption that all words found in the Tamil
corpus are potentially NEs. However, since Tamil
is a highly morphologically inflected language, the
same NE may occur in its various inflected forms
in the Tamil side of the corpora; hence, we collect
those words with the same prefix (of fixed size)
into a single bucket, called equivalence class, and
consider a representative prefix, referred to as sig-
nature of the collection for comparison. The
27
\x0cassumption here is that the common prefix would
stand for a Tamil NE, and all the members of the
equivalence class are the various inflected forms of
the NE. We use such a signature to classify a Ta-
mil word as potential transliteration of an English
word. Again, we consider only those signatures
that have occurred more than a threshold parame-
ter, FT, in the Tamil side of the comparable corpora,
in order to strengthen support for a meaningful
similarity in their frequency of occurrence.
We used a linear Support Vector Machine classifi-
er (details given in a later section) trained on a
sizable seed corpus of transliterations between
English and Tamil, and use it to identify potential
Tamil signatures with any of the NEs extracted
from the English side. We try to match each of the
NEs extracted from the English side, to every sig-
nature from the Tamil side, and produce an ordered
list of Tamil signatures that may be potential trans-
literations for a given English NE. Every Tamil
signature, thus, would get a score, which is used to
rank the signatures in the decreasing order of simi-
larity. Subsequently, we consider only those above
a certain threshold for analysis, and in addition,
consider only the top-n candidates.
3.2 Quality Refinement
Since a number of such transliteration candidates
are culled from the Tamil corpus for a given NE in
English, we further cull out unlikely candidates, by
re-ranking them using frequency cues from the
aligned comparable corpora. For this, we start
with the hypothesis, that the NEs will have similar
normalized frequency distributions with respect to
time, in the two corpora. Given that the news cor-
pora are expected to contain same names in similar
time periods in the two different languages, the
frequency distribution of words in the two
languages provides a strong clue about possible
transliteration pairs; however, such potential pairs
might also include other content words, such as,
  (soshaliSt),  (kavanamaa-
ka),  (keetpathu), etc., which are common
nouns, adjectives or even adverbs and verbs. On
the other hand, function words are expected to be
uniformly distributed in the corpus, and hence may
not have high variability like content words. Note
that the NEs in English are not usually inflected.
Since Tamil NEs usually have inflections, the
frequency of occurrence of a NE in Tamil must be
normalized across all forms, to make it reasonably
comparable to the frequency of the corresponding
English NE. This was taken care of by considering
the signature and its equivalence class. Hence the
frequency of occurrence of a NE (i.e., its signature)
in Tamil is the sum of frequencies of all members
in its equivalence class.
For identifying the names between the languages,
we first create a frequency distribution of every
word in English and Tamil, by creating temporal
bins of specific duration, covering the entire time-
line of the corpus. The frequency is calculated as
the number of occurrences of each signature in the
bin interval. Once the frequency distributions are
formed, they are normalized for every signature.
Given the normalized frequencies, two words are
considered to have same (or, similar) pattern of
occurrence in the corpus, if the normalized
frequency vectors of the two words are the same
(or, close within a threshold). Figure 1 shows the
frequency of the word Abishek, and its Tamil ver-
sion,  (apishek) as a frequency plot,
where a high correlation between the frequencies
can be observed.
Figure 1: Names Frequency Plot in Comparable Corpora
Hence, to refine the quality of the classifier output,
we re-rank the list of candidates, using the distance
between the frequency vectors of the English NE,
and the Tamil candidate signature. This step
moves up those signatures that have similar pat-
terns of occurrence, and moves down those that do
not. It is likely that such frequency cues from the
comparable corpora will make the quality of
matched transliteration pairs better, yielding better
mined data.
28
\x0c4 Experimental Setup & Results
In this section, we present the experimental setup
and the data that we used for mining transliteration
pairs from comparable corpora in two languages:
English and the Indian language, Tamil. We eva-
luate and present the effectiveness of the metho-
dology in extracting NE pairs, between these lan-
guages, under various parameters.
4.1 Comparable Corpora
We used a set of news articles from the New
Indian Express (in English) and Dinamani (in
Tamil) roughly covering similar events in English
and Tamil respective, and covering a period of
about 8 months, between January and August of
2007. The articles were verified to contain similar
set of NEs, though only a fraction of them are
expected to be legitimate transliteration pairs.
Others related NEs could be translations, for
example, chief minister in English vs 
(muthalvar) in Tamil, abbreviation which are not
usually transliterated but spelled out , for example,
ICC in English, and    (aicici) in Tamil, or
co-references , for example, New Delhi in English,
and  (puthu thilli) in Tamil. While the
number of articles used were roughly the same
(~2,400), the number of words in Tamil were only
about 70% of that in English. This is partially due
to the fact Tamil is a highly agglutinative lan-
guage, where various affixes (prefixes and suffixes
of other content words) stand for function words
and prepositions in English, thus do not contribute
to the word count. Further, since our focus is on
mining names, we expect the same NEs to be cov-
ered in both the corpora, and hence we do not
expect a severe impact on mining.
Corpus Time
Period
Size
Articles Words
New Indian
Express
(English)
2007.01.01 to
2007.08.31
2,359 347,050
Dinamani
(Tamil)
2007.01.01 to
2007.08.31
2,359 256,456
Table 1: Statistics on Comparable Corpora
From the above corpora, we first extracted all the
NEs from the English side, using the Stanford
NER tool [Finkel et al, 2005]. No multiword
expressions were considered for this experiment.
Also, only those NEs that have a frequency count
of more than a threshold value of FE were consi-
dered, in order to avoid unusual names that are
hard to identify in the comparable corpora. Thus,
we extracted from the above corpora, only a subset
of NEs found in the English side to be matched
with their potential transliteration pairs; for exam-
ple, for a parameter setting of FE to 10, we extract
only 274 legitimate NEs.
From the Tamil side of the corpora, we extracted
all words, and grouped them in to equivalence
classes, by considering a prefix of 5 characters.
That is, all words that share the same 5 characters
were considered to be morphological variations of
the same root word or NE in Tamil. After they
were grouped, the longest common prefix of the
group is extracted, and is used as the signature of
the equivalence class. It should be noted here that
though the number of unique words in the corpus
is about 46,503, the number of equivalence classes
to be considered changes depending on the filter-
ing threshold that we use in the Tamil side. For
example, at a threshold (FT) value of 1, the number
of equivalence classes is 14,101. It changes to
4,612 at a threshold (FT) value of 5, to 2,888 at a
threshold (FT) value of 10 and to 1779 at a thre-
shold (FT) value of 20. However, their signature
(i.e., longest common prefix) sizes ranged from 5
to 13 characters. Thus, we had about 14,101 equi-
valence classes, covering all the words from the
Tamil corpus. The equivalence classes thus
formed were as shown in Figure 2:
Tamil
Signature
Tamil
Equiv. Class

(aiSvaryaa)
 (aiSvaryaa),
 (aiSvaryaavin),
 (aiSvaryaavukku),
 (aiSvaryaavai),
 (aiSvaryaaviRkum),
 (aiSvaryaavutan)

(piram)
 (pirammapuththiraa),
 (pirammaaNdamaana),
 (pirampu),  (pirammaa)

(kaaveeri)
 (kaaveeri)
  
(aicici)
   (aicici),    (aicicyin),
   (aicici kku),    (aicicithaan),
   (aiciciyidam)
Figure 2: Signatures and Equivalence Classes
29
\x0cAs can be seen in the table, all elements of an
equivalence class share the same signature (by
definition). However, some signatures, such as
 (aiSvaryaa), correspond to an equiva-
lence class in which every element is a morpholog-
ical variation of the signature. Such equivalence
classes, we name them pure. Some signatures
represent only a subset of the members, as this set
includes some members unrelated to this stem; for
example, the signature  (piram), correctly
corresponds to  (pirammaa), and incorrect-
ly to the noun  (pirambu), as well as incor-
rectly to the adjective  (piram-
maandamaana). We name such equivalence
classes fuzzy. Some are well formed, but may not
ultimately contribute to our mining, being an ab-
breviation, such as ICC (in Tamil,   ), even
though they are used similar to any NE in Tamil.
While most equivalence classes contained inflec-
tions of single stems, we also found morphological
variations of several compound names in the same
equivalence class such as,  (akamathna-
kar),  (akamathaapaath), with 
(akamath).
4.2 Classifier for Transliteration Pair Identi-
fication
We used SVM-light [Joachims, 1999], a Support-
vector Machine (SVM) from Cornell University, to
identify near transliterations between English and
Tamil. We used a seed corpus consisting of 5000
transliteration pair samples collected from a differ-
ent resource, unrelated to the experimental compa-
rable corpora. In addition to the 5000 positive
examples from this seed corpus, 5000 negative
examples were extracted randomly, but incorrectly,
aligned names from this same seed corpus and
used for the classifier.
The features used for the classification are binary
features based on the length of the pair of strings
and all aligned unigram and bigram pairs, in each
direction, between the two strings in the seed cor-
pus in English and Tamil. The length features in-
clude the difference in lengths between them (up to
3), and a separate binary feature if they differ by
more than 3. For unigram pairs, the ith
character in
a language string is matched to (i-1)
st
, ith
and
(i+1)
st
characters of the other language string.
Each string is padded with special characters at the
beginning and the end, for appropriately forming
the unigrams for the first and the last characters of
the string. In the same manner, for binary features,
every bigram extracted with a sliding window of
size 2 from a language string, is matched with
those extracted from the other language string.
After the classifier is trained on the seed corpus of
hand crafted transliteration pairs, during the min-
ing phase, it compares every English NE extracted
from the English corpus, to every signature from
the Tamil corpus.
While classifier provided ranked list of all the sig-
natures from Tamil side, we consider only the top-
30 signatures (and the words in the equivalence
classes) for subsequent steps of our methodology.
We hand-verified a random sample of about 100
NEs from English side, and report in Table 5, the
fraction of the English NEs for which we found at
least one legitimate transliteration in the top-30
candidates (for example, the recall of the classifier
is 0.56, in identifying a right signature in the top-
30 candidates, when the threshold FE is 10 & FT is
1).
It is interesting to note that as the two threshold
factors are increased, the number of NEs extracted
from the English side decreases (as expected), and
the average number of positive classifications per
English NE reduces (as shown in Table 2), consi-
dering all NEs. This makes sense as the classifier
for identifying potential transliterations is trained
with sizable corpora and is hence accurate; but, as
the thresholds increase, it has less data to work
with, and possibly a fraction of legitimate translite-
rations also gets filtered with noise.
Parameters Extracted
English NEs
Ave. Positive
Classifications/
English NE
FE: 10, FT: 1 274 79.34
FE: 5, FT: 5 588 29.50
FE: 10, FT: 10 274 17.49
FE: 20, FT: 20 125 10.55
Table 2: Threshold Parameters vs Mining Quantity
Table 3 shows some sample results after the classi-
fication step with parameter values as (FE: 10, FT: 1).
Right signature for Aishwarya (corresponding to
all correct transliterations) has been ranked 10 and
Gandhi (with only a subset of the equivalence class
30
\x0ccorresponding to the right transliterations) has been
ranked at 8. Three different variations of Argenti-
na can be found, ranked 2nd
, 3rd
and 13th
. While, in
general no abbreviations are found (usually their
Tamil equivalents are spelled out), a rare case of
abbreviation (SAARC) and its right transliteration is
ranked 1st
.
English
Named Entity
Tamil Equivalence Class
Signature
Precision Rank
aishwarya  (aiSvaryaa) 1 10
argentina 
(arjantinaavila)
1 2
argentina 
(aarjantinaavi)
1 3
argentina 
(aarjantinaavil)
1 13
gandhi  (kaantha) 0.2121 8
saarc  (saark) 1 1
Table 3: Ranked List after Classification Step
4.3 Enhancing the Quality of Transliteration-
Pairs
For the frequency analysis, we use the frequency
distribution of the words in English and Tamil side
of the comparable corpora, counting the number of
occurrences of NEs in English and the Tamil
signatures in each temporal bin spanning the entire
corpus. We consider one temporal bin to be equal
to two successive days. Thus, each of the English
NEs and the Tamil signatures is represented by a
vector of dimension approximately 120. We com-
pute the distance between the two vectors, and
hypothesize that they may represent the same (or,
similar) name, if the difference between them is
zero (or, small). Note that, as mentioned earlier,
the frequency vector of the Tamil signature will
contain the sum of individual frequencies of the
elements in the equivalence class corresponding to
it. Given that the classifier step outputs a list of
English NEs, and associated with each entry, a
ranked list of Tamil signatures that are identified as
potential transliteration by the classifier, we com-
pute the distance between the frequency vector of
every English NE, with each of the top-30 signa-
tures in the ranked list. We re-rank the top-30
candidate strings, using this distance measure. The
output is similar to that shown in Table 4, but with
possibly a different rank order.
English
Named Entity
Tamil Equivalence Class
Signature
Precision Rank
aishwarya  (aiSvaryaa) 1 1
argentina 
(arjantinaavila)
1 1
argentina 
(aarjantinaavi)
1 3
argentina 
(aarjantinaavil)
1 14
gandhi  (kaantha) 0.2121 16
saarc  (saark) 1 1
Table 4: Ranked List after Frequency Analysis Step
On comparing Table 3 and 4, we observe that some
of the ranks have moved for the better, and some
of them for the worse. It is interesting to note that
the ranking of different stems corresponding to
Argentina has moved differently. It is quite likely
that merging these three equivalence classes cor-
responding to the English NE Argentina might re-
sult in a frequency profile that is more closely
aligned to that of the English NE.
4.4 Overall Performance of Transliteration
Pairs Mining
To find the effectiveness of each step of the mining
process in identifying the right signatures (and
hence, the equivalence classes) for a given English
NE, we computed the Mean Reciprocal Rank
(MRR) of the random sample of 100 transliteration
pairs mined, in two different ways: First, we com-
puted MRRpure, which corresponded to the first oc-
currence of a pure equivalence class, and MRRfuzzy,
which corresponded to the first occurrence of a
fuzzy equivalence class in the random samples.
MRRfuzzy captures how successful the mining was
in identifying one possible transliteration, MRRpure,
captures how successful we were in identifying an
equivalence class that contains only right translite-
rations2
. In addition, these metrics were computed,
corresponding to different frequency thresholds for
the occurrence of a English NE (FE) and a Tamil
signature (FT). The overall quality profile of the
mining framework in mining the NE transliteration
pairs in English and Tamil is shown in Table 5.
Additionally, we also report the recall metric (the
fraction of English NEs, for which at least one le-
2
However, it should be noted that the current metrics
neither capture how pure an equivalence class is (frac-
tion of the set that are correct transliterations), nor the
size of the equivalence class. We hope to specify these
as part of quality of mining, in our subsequent work.
31
\x0cgitimate Tamil signature was identified) computed
on a randomly chosen 100 entity pairs.
Parameters
Classification
Step
Frequency
Analysis Step Re-
call
MRR
fuzzy
MRR
pure
MRR
fuzzy
MRR
pure
FE: 10, FT: 1 0.3579 0.2831 0.3990 0.3145 0.56
FE: 5, FT: 5 0.4490 0.3305 0.5064 0.3529 0.61
FE: 10, FT: 10 0.4081 0.2731 0.4930 0.3494 0.57
FE: 20, FT: 20 0.3489 0.2381 0.4190 0.2779 0.47
Table 5: Quality Profile of NE Pairs Extraction
First, it should be noted that the recalls are the
same for both the steps, since Frequency Analysis
step merely re-arranges the output of the Classifi-
cation step. Second, the recall figures drop, as
more filtering is applied to the NEs on both sides.
This trend makes sense, since the classifier gets
less data to work with, as more legitimate words
are filtered out with noise. Third, as can be ex-
pected, MRRpure is less than the MRRfuzzy at every
step of the mining process. Fourth, we see that the
MRRpure and the MRRfuzzy improve between the two
mining steps, indicating that the time-series analy-
sis has, in general, made the output better.
Finally, we find that the MRRpure and the MRRfuzzy
keep dropping with increased filtering of English
NEs and Tamil signatures based on their frequen-
cy, in both the classification and frequency analy-
sis steps. The fall of the MRRs after the classifica-
tion steps is due to the fact that the classifier has
less and less data with the increasing threshold,
and hence some legitimate transliterations may be
filtered out as noise. However, the frequency
analysis step critically depends on availability of
sufficient words from the Tamil side for similarity
testing. In frequency analysis step, the fall of
MRRs from threshold 5 to 10 is 0.0134 on MRRfuzzy
and 0.0035 on MRRpure. This fall is comparatively
less to the fall of MRRs from threshold 10 to 20
which is 0.074 on MRRfuzzy and 0.0715 on MRRpure.
This may be due to the fact that the number of legi-
timate transliterations filtered out from threshold 5
to 10 is less when compared to the number of legi-
timate transliterations filtered out from threshold
10 to 20. These results show that with less number
of words filtered, it can get reasonable recall and
MRR values. More profiling experiments may be
needed to validate this claim.
5 Open Issues in NE pair Mining
In this paper, we outline our experience in mining
parallel NEs between English and Tamil, in an
approach similar to the one discussed in [Klemen-
tiev and Roth, 2006]. Over and above, we made
parameter choices, and some procedural modifica-
tions to bridge the underspecified methodology
given in the above work. While the results are
promising, we find several issues that need further
research. We outline some of them below:
5.1 Indistinguishable Signatures
Table 7 shows a signature that offers little help in
distinguishing a set of words. Both the words,
  (cennai) and morphological variations of
  (cen), share the same 5-character signature,
namely,   (cenna), affecting the frequency
distribution of the signature adversely.
English
Named
Entity
Tamil
Named
Entity
Tamil
Equivalent Class
chennai
 
(cennai)
  (cennai),   (cennaiyil),
  (cennaiyilirunthu),
  (cennin),   (cen-
nukku),  (cennaiyai)
Table 7: Multiple-Entity Equivalence Class
5.2 Abbreviations
Table 8 shows a set of abbreviations, that are not
identified well in our NE pair mining. Between the
two languages, the abbreviations may be either
expanded, as BJP expanded to (the equivalent
translation for Bharatiya Janatha Party in Tamil),
or spelled out, as in BSNL referred to as
 (pieSenel). The last example is very
interesting, as each W in English is written out as
 (tapiLyuu). All these are hard to capture
by a simple classifier that is trained on well-formed
transliteration pairs.
English
Named
Entity
Tamil
Named Entity
BJP
 (paajaka), ... (paa. ja. ka.), 
   (paarathiiya janathaa katci)
BSNL
 (pieSenel), 
(pieSenellin),  (piesenellai)
WWW

(tapiLyuutapiLyuutapiLyuu)
Table 8: Multiple-Entity Equivalence Class
32
\x0c5.3 Multiword Expressions
This methodology is currently designed for mining
only single word expressions. It may be an inter-
esting line of research to mine multiword expres-
sions automatically.
6 Related Work
Our work essentially follows a similar procedure
as reported in [Klementiev and Roth, 2006] paper,
but applied to English-Tamil language pair. Earli-
er works, such as [Cucerzan and Yarowsky, 1999]
and [Collins and Singer, 1999] addressed identifi-
cation of NEs from untagged corpora. They relied
on significant contextual and morphological clues.
[Hetland, 2004] outlined methodologies based on
time distribution of terms in a corpus to identify
NEs, but only in English. While a large body of
literature exists on transliteration, we merely point
out that the focus of this work (based on [Klemen-
tiev and Roth, 2006]) is not on transliteration, but
mining transliteration pairs, which may be used for
developing a transliteration system.
7 Conclusions
In this paper, we focused on mining NE transliteration
pairs in two different languages, namely English and an
Indian language, Tamil. While we adopted a methodol-
ogy similar to that in [Klementiev and Roth, 2006], our
focus was on mining parallel NE transliteration pairs,
leveraging the availability of comparable corpora and a
well-trained linear classifier to identify transliteration
pairs. We profiled the performance of our mining
framework on several parameters, and presented the
results. Our experiment results are inline with those
reported by [Klementiev and Roth, 2006]. Given that
the NE pairs are an important resource for several NLP
tasks, we hope that such a methodology to mine the
comparable corpora may be fruitful, as comparable
corpora may be freely available in perpetuity in several
of the worlds languages.
8 Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Raghavendra Udupa,
Chris Quirk, Aasish Pappu, Baskaran Sankaran,
Jagadeesh Jagarlamudi and Debapratim De for
their help.
References
Nasreen AbdulJaleel and Leah S. Larkey. 2003. Statistical
transliteration for English-Arabic cross language informa-
tion retrieval. In Proceedings of CIKM, pages 139146,
New York, NY, USA.
Jenny Rose Finkel, Trond Grenager, and Christopher
Manning. 2005. Incorporating Non-local Information into
Information Extraction Systems by Gibbs Sampling. In
Proceedings of the 43nd Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2005), pp. 363-370.
L Haizhou, Z Min and S Jian. 2004. A Joint Source-Channel
Model for Machine Transliteration. In Proceedings of 42nd
Meeting of Assoc. of Computational Linguistics.
Magnus Lie Hetland. 2004. Data Mining in Time Series Data-
bases, a chapter in A Survey of Recent Methods for Effi-
cient Retrieval of Similar Time Sequences. World Scientif-
ic.
T. Joachims. 1999. 11 in: Making large-Scale SVM
Learning Practical. Advances in Kernel Methods -
Support Vector Learning, B. Scholkopf and C. Burges
and A. Smola (ed.), MIT Press.
Sung Young Jung, SungLim Hong, and Eunok Paek. 2000. An
English to Korean transliteration model of extended mar-
kov window. In Proceedings of the International Confe-
rence on Computational Linguistics (COLING), pages
383389.
Alexandre Klementiev and Dan Roth. 2006. Named Entity
Transliteration and Discovery from Multilingual Compara-
ble Corpora. In Proceedings of the Human Language
Technology Conference of the North American Chapter of
the ACL, pages 8288.
Kevin Knight and Jonathan Graehl. 1997. Machine translite-
ration. In Proceedings of the Meeting of the European As-
sociation of Computational Linguistics, pages 128135.
Yusuke Shinyama and Satoshi Sekine. 2004. Named entity
discovery using comparable news articles. In Proceedings
the International Conference on Computational Linguistics
(COLING), pages 848853.
Richard Sproat, Tao Tao, ChengXiang Zhai. 2006. Named
Entity Transliteration with Comparable Corpora. In Pro-
ceedings of the 21st International Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics and 44th Annual Meeting of the ACL,
pages 7380, Sydney.
Tao Tao and ChengXiang Zhai. 2005. Mining comparable
bilingual text corpora for cross-language information inte-
gration. In KDD05, pages 691696.
Tao Tao, Su-Youn Yoon, Andrew Fister, Richard Sproat, and
ChengXiang Zhai. 2006. Unsupervised named entity transli-
teration using temporal and phonetic correlation. In EMNLP
2006, Sydney, July.
Paula Virga and Sanjeev Khudanpur. 2003. Transliteration of
Proper Names in Cross-Lingual Information Retrieval. In
Proceedings of Workshop on Multilingual and Mixed-
Language Named Entity Recognition.
33
\x0c'