Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT, pages 28–36,
Columbus, Ohio, USA, June 2008. c
2008 Association for Computational Linguistics
The Tradeoffs Between Open and Traditional Relation Extraction
Michele Banko and Oren Etzioni
Turing Center
University of Washington
Computer Science and Engineering
Box 352350
Seattle, WA 98195, USA
banko,etzioni@cs.washington.edu
Abstract
Traditional Information Extraction (IE) takes
a relation name and hand-tagged examples of
that relation as input. Open IE is a relation-
independent extraction paradigm that is tai-
lored to massive and heterogeneous corpora
such as the Web. An Open IE system extracts a
diverse set of relational tuples from text with-
out any relation-specific input. How is Open
IE possible? We analyze a sample of English
sentences to demonstrate that numerous rela-
tionships are expressed using a compact set
of relation-independent lexico-syntactic pat-
terns, which can be learned by an Open IE sys-
tem.
What are the tradeoffs between Open IE and
traditional IE? We consider this question in
the context of two tasks. First, when the
number of relations is massive, and the rela-
tions themselves are not pre-specified, we ar-
gue that Open IE is necessary. We then present
a new model for Open IE called O-CRF and
show that it achieves increased precision and
nearly double the recall than the model em-
ployed by TEXTRUNNER, the previous state-
of-the-art Open IE system. Second, when the
number of target relations is small, and their
names are known in advance, we show that
O-CRF is able to match the precision of a tra-
ditional extraction system, though at substan-
tially lower recall. Finally, we show how to
combine the two types of systems into a hy-
brid that achieves higher precision than a tra-
ditional extractor, with comparable recall.
1 Introduction
Relation Extraction (RE) is the task of recognizing
the assertion of a particular relationship between two
or more entities in text. Typically, the target relation
(e.g., seminar location) is given to the RE system as
input along with hand-crafted extraction patterns or
patterns learned from hand-labeled training exam-
ples (Brin, 1998; Riloff and Jones, 1999; Agichtein
and Gravano, 2000). Such inputs are specific to the
target relation. Shifting to a new relation requires a
person to manually create new extraction patterns or
specify new training examples. This manual labor
scales linearly with the number of target relations.
In 2007, we introduced a new approach to the
RE task, called Open Information Extraction (Open
IE), which scales RE to the Web. An Open IE sys-
tem extracts a diverse set of relational tuples without
requiring any relation-specific human input. Open
IE’s extraction process is linear in the number of
documents in the corpus, and constant in the num-
ber of relations. Open IE is ideally suited to corpora
such as the Web, where the target relations are not
known in advance, and their number is massive.
The relationship between standard RE systems
and the new Open IE paradigm is analogous to the
relationship between lexicalized and unlexicalized
parsers. Statistical parsers are usually lexicalized
(i.e. they make parsing decisions based on n-gram
statistics computed for specific lexemes). However,
Klein and Manning (2003) showed that unlexical-
ized parsers are more accurate than previously be-
lieved, and can be learned in an unsupervised man-
ner. Klein and Manning analyze the tradeoffs be-
28
tween the two approaches to parsing and argue that
state-of-the-art parsing will benefit from employing
both approaches in concert. In this paper, we exam-
ine the tradeoffs between relation-specific (“lexical-
ized”) extraction and relation-independent (“unlexi-
calized”) extraction and reach an analogous conclu-
sion.
Is it, in fact, possible to learn relation-independent
extraction patterns? What do they look like? We first
consider the task of open extraction, in which the
goal is to extract relationships from text when their
number is large and identity unknown. We then con-
sider the targeted extraction task, in which the goal
is to locate instances of a known relation. How does
the precision and recall of Open IE compare with
that of relation-specific extraction? Is it possible to
combine Open IE with a “lexicalized” RE system
to improve performance? This paper addresses the
questions raised above and makes the following con-
tributions:
• We present O-CRF, a new Open IE system that
uses Conditional Random Fields, and demon-
strate its ability to extract a variety of rela-
tions with a precision of 88.3% and recall of
45.2%. We compare O-CRF to O-NB, the ex-
traction model previously used by TEXTRUN-
NER (Banko et al., 2007), a state-of-the-art
Open IE system. We show that O-CRF achieves
a relative gain in F-measure of 63% over O-NB.
• We provide a corpus-based characterization of
how binary relationships are expressed in En-
glish to demonstrate that learning a relation-
independent extractor is feasible, at least for the
English language.
• In the targeted extraction case, we compare the
performance of O-CRF to a traditional RE sys-
tem and find that without any relation-specific
input, O-CRF obtains the same precision with
lower recall compared to a lexicalized extractor
trained using hundreds, and sometimes thou-
sands, of labeled examples per relation.
• We present H-CRF, an ensemble-based extrac-
tor that learns to combine the output of the
lexicalized and unlexicalized RE systems and
achieves a 10% relative increase in precision
with comparable recall over traditional RE.
The remainder of this paper is organized as fol-
lows. Section 2 assesses the promise of relation-
independent extraction for the English language by
characterizing how a sample of relations is ex-
pressed in text. Section 3 describes O-CRF, a new
Open IE system, as well as R1-CRF, a standard RE
system; a hybrid RE system is then presented in Sec-
tion 4. Section 5 reports on our experimental results.
Section 6 considers related work, which is then fol-
lowed by a discussion of future work.
2 The Nature of Relations in English
How are relationships expressed in English sen-
tences? In this section, we show that many rela-
tionships are consistently expressed using a com-
pact set of relation-independent lexico-syntactic pat-
terns, and quantify their frequency based on a sam-
ple of 500 sentences selected at random from an IE
training corpus developed by (Bunescu and Mooney,
2007).1 This observation helps to explain the suc-
cess of open relation extraction, which learns a
relation-independent extraction model as described
in Section 3.1.
Previous work has noted that distinguished re-
lations, such as hypernymy (is-a) and meronymy
(part-whole), are often expressed using a small num-
ber of lexico-syntactic patterns (Hearst, 1992). The
manual identification of these patterns inspired a
body of work in which this initial set of extraction
patterns is used to seed a bootstrapping process that
automatically acquires additional patterns for is-a or
part-whole relations (Etzioni et al., 2005; Snow et
al., 2005; Girju et al., 2006), It is quite natural then
to consider whether the same can be done for all bi-
nary relationships.
To characterize how binary relationships are ex-
pressed, one of the authors of this paper carefully
studied the labeled relation instances and produced
a lexico-syntactic pattern that captured the relation
for each instance. Interestingly, we found that 95%
of the patterns could be grouped into the categories
listed in Table 1. Note, however, that the patterns
shown in Table 1 are greatly simplified by omitting
the exact conditions under which they will reliably
produce a correct extraction. For instance, while
many relationships are indicated strictly by a verb,
1
For simplicity, we restrict our study to binary relationships.
29
Simplified
Relative Lexico-Syntactic
Frequency Category Pattern
37.8 Verb E1 Verb E2
X established Y
22.8 Noun+Prep E1 NP Prep E2
X settlement with Y
16.0 Verb+Prep E1 Verb Prep E2
X moved to Y
9.4 Infinitive E1 to Verb E2
X plans to acquire Y
5.2 Modifier E1 Verb E2 Noun
X is Y winner
1.8 Coordinaten E1 (and|,|-|:) E2 NP
X-Y deal
1.0 Coordinatev E1 (and|,) E2 Verb
X , Y merge
0.8 Appositive E1 NP (:|,)? E2
X hometown : Y
Table 1: Taxonomy of Binary Relationships: Nearly 95%
of 500 randomly selected sentences belongs to one of the
eight categories above.
detailed contextual cues are required to determine,
exactly which, if any, verb observed in the context
of two entities is indicative of a relationship between
them. In the next section, we show how we can use a
Conditional Random Field, a model that can be de-
scribed as a finite state machine with weighted tran-
sitions, to learn a model of how binary relationships
are expressed in English.
3 Relation Extraction
Given a relation name, labeled examples of the re-
lation, and a corpus, traditional Relation Extraction
(RE) systems output instances of the given relation
found in the corpus. In the open extraction task, re-
lation names are not known in advance. The sole
input to an Open IE system is a corpus, along with
a small set of relation-independent heuristics, which
are used to learn a general model of extraction for
all relations at once.
The task of open extraction is notably more diffi-
cult than the traditional formulation of RE for sev-
eral reasons. First, traditional RE systems do not
attempt to extract the text that signifies a relation in
a sentence, since the relation name is given. In con-
trast, an Open IE system has to locate both the set of
entities believed to participate in a relation, and the
salient textual cues that indicate the relation among
them. Knowledge extracted by an open system takes
the form of relational tuples (r, e1, . . . , en) that con-
tain two or more entities e1, . . . , en, and r, the name
of the relationship among them. For example, from
the sentence, “Microsoft is headquartered in beau-
tiful Redmond”, we expect to extract (is headquar-
tered in, Microsoft, Redmond). Moreover, following
extraction, the system must identify exactly which
relation strings r correspond to a general relation of
interest. To ensure high-levels of coverage on a per-
relation basis, we need, for example to deduce that
“ ’s headquarters in”, “is headquartered in” and “is
based in” are different ways of expressing HEAD-
QUARTERS(X,Y).
Second, a relation-independent extraction process
makes it difficult to leverage the full set of features
typically used when performing extraction one re-
lation at a time. For instance, the presence of the
words company and headquarters will be useful in
detecting instances of the HEADQUARTERS(X,Y)
relation, but are not useful features for identifying
relations in general. Finally, RE systems typically
use named-entity types as a guide (e.g., the second
argument to HEADQUARTERS should be a LOCA-
TION). In Open IE, the relations are not known in
advance, and neither are their argument types.
The unique nature of the open extraction task has
led us to develop O-CRF, an open extraction sys-
tem that uses the power of graphical models to iden-
tify relations in text. The remainder of this section
describes O-CRF, and compares it to the extraction
model employed by TEXTRUNNER, the first Open
IE system (Banko et al., 2007). We then describe
R1-CRF, a RE system that can be applied in a typi-
cal one-relation-at-a-time setting.
3.1 Open Extraction with Conditional Random
Fields
TEXTRUNNER initially treated Open IE as a clas-
sification problem, using a Naive Bayes classifier to
predict whether heuristically-chosen tokens between
two entities indicated a relationship or not. For the
remainder of this paper, we refer to this model as
O-NB. Whereas classifiers predict the label of a sin-
gle variable, graphical models model multiple, in-
30
K a f k a
E N T O E N T
O E N T B 	 R E L I 	 R E L
, P r
a g u e
a w
r i t
e
r b o r n i n
Figure 1: Relation Extraction as Sequence Labeling: A
CRF is used to identify the relationship, born in, between
Kafka and Prague
terdependent variables. Conditional Random Fields
(CRFs) (Lafferty et al., 2001), are undirected graphi-
cal models trained to maximize the conditional prob-
ability of a finite set of labels Y given a set of input
observations X. By making a first-order Markov as-
sumption about the dependencies among the output
variables Y , and arranging variables sequentially in
a linear chain, RE can be treated as a sequence la-
beling problem. Linear-chain CRFs have been ap-
plied to a variety of sequential text processing tasks
including named-entity recognition, part-of-speech
tagging, word segmentation, semantic role identifi-
cation, and recently relation extraction (Culotta et
al., 2006).
3.1.1 Training
As with O-NB, O-CRF’s training process is self-
supervised. O-CRF applies a handful of relation-
independent heuristics to the PennTreebank and ob-
tains a set of labeled examples in the form of rela-
tional tuples. The heuristics were designed to cap-
ture dependencies typically obtained via syntactic
parsing and semantic role labelling. For example,
a heuristic used to identify positive examples is the
extraction of noun phrases participating in a subject-
verb-object relationship, e.g., “<Einstein> received
<the Nobel Prize> in 1921.” An example of a
heuristic that locates negative examples is the ex-
traction of objects that cross the boundary of an ad-
verbial clause, e.g. “He studied <Einstein’s work>
when visiting <Germany>.”
The resulting set of labeled examples are de-
scribed using features that can be extracted without
syntactic or semantic analysis and used to train a
CRF, a sequence model that learns to identify spans
of tokens believed to indicate explicit mentions of
relationships between entities.
O-CRF first applies a phrase chunker to each doc-
ument, and treats the identified noun phrases as can-
didate entities for extraction. Each pair of enti-
ties appearing no more than a maximum number of
words apart and their surrounding context are con-
sidered as possible evidence for RE. The entity pair
serves to anchor each end of a linear-chain CRF, and
both entities in the pair are assigned a fixed label of
ENT. Tokens in the surrounding context are treated
as possible textual cues that indicate a relation, and
can be assigned one of the following labels: B-REL,
indicating the start of a relation, I-REL, indicating
the continuation of a predicted relation, or O, indi-
cating the token is not believed to be part of an ex-
plicit relationship. An illustration is given in Fig-
ure 1.
The set of features used by O-CRF is largely
similar to those used by O-NB and other state-
of-the-art relation extraction systems, They in-
clude part-of-speech tags (predicted using a sepa-
rately trained maximum-entropy model), regular ex-
pressions (e.g.detecting capitalization, punctuation,
etc.), context words, and conjunctions of features
occurring in adjacent positions within six words to
the left and six words to the right of the current
word. A unique aspect of O-CRF is that O-CRF
uses context words belonging only to closed classes
(e.g. prepositions and determiners) but not function
words such as verbs or nouns. Thus, unlike most RE
systems, O-CRF does not try to recognize semantic
classes of entities.
O-CRF has a number of limitations, most of which
are shared with other systems that perform extrac-
tion from natural language text. First, O-CRF only
extracts relations that are explicitly mentioned in
the text; implicit relationships that could inferred
from the text would need to be inferred from O-
CRF extractions. Second, O-CRF focuses on rela-
tionships that are primarily word-based, and not in-
dicated solely from punctuation or document-level
features. Finally, relations must occur between en-
tity names within the same sentence.
O-CRF was built using the CRF implementation
provided by MALLET (McCallum, 2002), as well
as part-of-speech tagging and phrase-chunking tools
available from OPENNLP.2
2
http://opennlp.sourceforge.net
31
3.1.2 Extraction
Given an input corpus, O-CRF makes a single pass
over the data, and performs entity identification us-
ing a phrase chunker. The CRF is then used to label
instances relations for each possible entity pair, sub-
ject to the constraints mentioned previously.
Following extraction, O-CRF applies the RE-
SOLVER algorithm (Yates and Etzioni, 2007) to find
relation synonyms, the various ways in which a re-
lation is expressed in text. RESOLVER uses a prob-
abilistic model to predict if two strings refer to the
same item, based on relational features, in an unsu-
pervised manner. In Section 5.2 we report that RE-
SOLVER boosts the recall of O-CRF by 50%.
3.2 Relation-Specific Extraction
To compare the behavior of open, or “unlexicalized,”
extraction to relation-specific, or “lexicalized” ex-
traction, we developed a CRF-based extractor under
the traditional RE paradigm. We refer to this system
as R1-CRF.
Although the graphical structure of R1-CRF is the
same as O-CRF R1-CRF differs in a few ways. A
given relation R is specified a priori, and R1-CRF is
trained from hand-labeled positive and negative in-
stances of R. The extractor is also permitted to use
all lexical features, and is not restricted to closed-
class words as is O-CRF. Since R is known in ad-
vance, if R1-CRF outputs a tuple at extraction time,
the tuple is believed to be an instance of R.
4 Hybrid Relation Extraction
Since O-CRF and R1-CRF have complementary
views of the extraction process, it is natural to won-
der whether they can be combined to produce a
more powerful extractor. In many machine learn-
ing settings, the use of an ensemble of diverse clas-
sifiers during prediction has been observed to yield
higher levels of performance compared to individ-
ual algorithms. We now describe an ensemble-based
or hybrid approach to RE that leverages the differ-
ent views offered by open, self-supervised extraction
in O-CRF, and lexicalized, supervised extraction in
R1-CRF.
4.1 Stacking
Stacked generalization, or stacking, (Wolpert,
1992), is an ensemble-based framework in which the
goal is learn a meta-classifier from the output of sev-
eral base-level classifiers. The training set used to
train the meta-classifier is generated using a leave-
one-out procedure: for each base-level algorithm, a
classifier is trained from all but one training example
and then used to generate a prediction for the left-
out example. The meta-classifier is trained using the
predictions of the base-level classifiers as features,
and the true label as given by the training data.
Previous studies (Ting and Witten, 1999; Zenko
and Dzeroski, 2002; Sigletos et al., 2005) have
shown that the probabilities of each class value as
estimated by each base-level algorithm are effective
features when training meta-learners. Stacking was
shown to be consistently more effective than voting,
another popular ensemble-based method in which
the outputs of the base-classifiers are combined ei-
ther through majority vote or by taking the class
value with the highest average probability.
4.2 Stacked Relation Extraction
We used the stacking methodology to build an
ensemble-based extractor, referred to as H-CRF.
Treating the output of an O-CRF and R1-CRF as
black boxes, H-CRF learns to predict which, if any,
tokens found between a pair of entities (e1, e2), in-
dicates a relationship. Due to the sequential nature
of our RE task, H-CRF employs a CRF as the meta-
learner, as opposed to a decision tree or regression-
based classifier.
H-CRF uses the probability distribution over the
set of possible labels according to each O-CRF and
R1-CRF as features. To obtain the probability at
each position of a linear-chain CRF, the constrained
forward-backward technique described in (Culotta
and McCallum, 2004) is used. H-CRF also computes
the Monge Elkan distance (Monge and Elkan, 1996)
between the relations predicted by O-CRF and R1-
CRF and includes the result in the feature set. An
additional meta-feature utilized by H-CRF indicates
whether either or both base extractors return “no re-
lation” for a given pair of entities. In addition to
these numeric features, H-CRF uses a subset of the
base features used by O-CRF and R1-CRF. At each
32
O-CRF O-NB
Category P R F1 P R F1
Verb 93.9 65.1 76.9 100 38.6 55.7
Noun+Prep 89.1 36.0 51.3 100 9.7 55.7
Verb+Prep 95.2 50.0 65.6 95.2 25.3 40.0
Infinitive 95.7 46.8 62.9 100 25.5 40.6
Other 0 0 0 0 0 0
All 88.3 45.2 59.8 86.6 23.2 36.6
Table 2: Open Extraction by Relation Category. O-CRF
outperforms O-NB, obtaining nearly double its recall and
increased precision. O-CRF’s gains are partly due to its
lower false positive rate for relationships categorized as
“Other.”
given position i between e1 and e2, the presence of
the word observed at i as a feature, as well as the
presence of the part-of-speech-tag at i.
5 Experimental Results
The following experiments demonstrate the benefits
of Open IE for two tasks: open extraction and tar-
geted extraction.
Section 5.1, assesses the ability of O-CRF to lo-
cate instances of relationships when the number of
relationships is large and their identity is unknown.
We show that without any relation-specific input, O-
CRF extracts binary relationships with high precision
and a recall that nearly doubles that of O-NB.
Sections 5.2 and 5.3 compare O-CRF to tradi-
tional and hybrid RE when the goal is to locate in-
stances of a small set of known target relations. We
find that while single-relation extraction, as embod-
ied by R1-CRF, achieves comparatively higher lev-
els of recall, it takes hundreds, and sometimes thou-
sands, of labeled examples per relation, for R1-
CRF to approach the precision obtained by O-CRF,
which is self-trained without any relation-specific
input. We also show that the combination of unlex-
icalized, open extraction in O-CRF and lexicalized,
supervised extraction in R1-CRF improves precision
and F-measure compared to a standalone RE system.
5.1 Open Extraction
This section contrasts the performance of O-CRF
with that of O-NB on an Open IE task, and shows
that O-CRF achieves both double the recall and in-
creased precision relative to O-NB. For this exper-
iment, we used the set of 500 sentences3 described
in Section 2. Both IE systems were designed and
trained prior to the examination of the sample sen-
tences; thus the results on this sentence sample pro-
vide a fair measurement of their performance.
While the TEXTRUNNER system was previously
found to extract over 7.5 million tuples from a cor-
pus of 9 million Web pages, these experiments are
the first to assess its true recall over a known set of
relational tuples. As reported in Table 2, O-CRF ex-
tracts relational tuples with a precision of 88.3% and
a recall of 45.2%. O-CRF achieves a relative gain
in F1 of 63.4% over the O-NB model employed by
TEXTRUNNER, which obtains a precision of 86.6%
and a recall of 23.2%. The recall of O-CRF nearly
doubles that of O-NB.
O-CRF is able to extract instances of the four
most frequently observed relation types – Verb,
Noun+Prep, Verb+Prep and Infinitive. Three of the
four remaining types – Modifier, Coordinaten and
Coordinatev – which comprise only 8% of the sam-
ple, are not handled due to simplifying assumptions
made by both O-CRF and O-NB that tokens indicat-
ing a relation occur between entity mentions in the
sentence.
5.2 O-CRF vs. R1-CRF Extraction
To compare performance of the extractors when a
small set of target relationships is known in ad-
vance, we used labeled data for four different re-
lations – corporate acquisitions, birthplaces, inven-
tors of products and award winners. The first two
datasets were collected from the Web, and made
available by Bunescu and Mooney (2007). To aug-
ment the size of our corpus, we used the same tech-
nique to collect data for two additional relations, and
manually labelled positive and negative instances by
hand over all collections. For each of the four re-
lations in our collection, we trained R1-CRF from
labeled training data, and ran each of R1-CRF and
O-CRF over the respective test sets, and compared
the precision and recall of all tuples output by each
system.
Table 3 shows that from the start, O-CRF achieves
a high level of precision – 75.0% – without any
3
Available at http://www.cs.washington.edu/research/
knowitall/hlt-naacl08-data.txt
33
O-CRF R1-CRF
Relation P R P R Train Ex
Acquisition 75.6 19.5 67.6 69.2 3042
Birthplace 90.6 31.1 92.3 64.4 1853
InventorOf 88.0 17.5 81.3 50.8 682
WonAward 62.5 15.3 73.6 52.8 354
All 75.0 18.4 73.9 58.4 5930
Table 3: Precision (P) and Recall (R) of O-CRF and R1-
CRF.
O-CRF R1-CRF
Relation P R P R Train Ex
Acquisition 75.6 19.5 67.6 69.2 3042∗
Birthplace 90.6 31.1 92.3 53.3 600
InventorOf 88.0 17.5 81.3 50.8 682∗
WonAward 62.5 15.3 65.4 61.1 50
All 75.0 18.4 70.17 60.7 >4374
Table 4: For 4 relations, a minimum of 4374 hand-tagged
examples is needed for R1-CRF to approximately match
the precision of O-CRF for each relation. A “∗
” indicates
the use of all available training data; in these cases, R1-
CRF was unable to match the precision of O-CRF.
relation-specific data. Using labeled training data,
the R1-CRF system achieves a slightly lower preci-
sion of 73.9%.
Exactly how many training examples per relation
does it take R1-CRF to achieve a comparable level
of precision? We varied the number of training ex-
amples given to R1-CRF, and found that in 3 out of
4 cases it takes hundreds, if not thousands of labeled
examples for R1-CRF to achieve acceptable levels
of precision. In two cases – acquisitions and inven-
tions – R1-CRF is unable to match the precision of
O-CRF, even with many labeled examples. Table 4
summarizes these findings.
Using labeled data, R1-CRF obtains a recall of
58.4%, compared to O-CRF, whose recall is 18.4%.
A large number of false negatives on the part of O-
CRF can be attributed to its lack of lexical features,
which are often crucial when part-of-speech tagging
errors are present. For instance, in the sentence, “Ya-
hoo To Acquire Inktomi”, “Acquire” is mistaken for
a proper noun, and sufficient evidence of the exis-
tence of a relationship is absent. The lexicalized R1-
CRF extractor is able to recover from this error; the
presence of the word “Acquire” is enough to recog-
R1-CRF Hybrid
Relation P R F1 P R F1
Acquisition 67.6 69.2 68.4 76.0 67.5 71.5
Birthplace 93.6 64.4 76.3 96.5 62.2 75.6
InventorOf 81.3 50.8 62.5 87.5 52.5 65.6
WonAward 73.6 52.8 61.5 75.0 50.0 60.0
All 73.9 58.4 65.2 79.2 56.9 66.2
Table 5: A hybrid extractor that uses O-CRF improves
precision for all relations, at a small cost to recall.
nize the positive instance, despite the incorrect part-
of-speech tag.
Another source of recall issues facing O-CRF is
its ability to discover synonyms for a given relation.
We found that while RESOLVER improves the rela-
tive recall of O-CRF by nearly 50%, O-CRF locates
fewer synonyms per relation compared to its lexical-
ized counterpart. With RESOLVER, O-CRF finds an
average of 6.5 synonyms per relation compared to
R1-CRF’s 16.25.
In light of our findings, the relative tradeoffs of
open versus traditional RE are as follows. Open IE
automatically offers a high level of precision without
requiring manual labor per relation, at the expense
of recall. When relationships in a corpus are not
known, or their number is massive, Open IE is es-
sential for RE. When higher levels of recall are desir-
able for a small set of target relations, traditional RE
is more appropriate. However, in this case, one must
be willing to undertake the cost of acquiring labeled
training data for each relation, either via a computa-
tional procedure such as bootstrapped learning or by
the use of human annotators.
5.3 Hybrid Extraction
In this section, we explore the performance of H-
CRF, an ensemble-based extractor that learns to per-
form RE for a set of known relations based on the
individual behaviors of O-CRF and R1-CRF.
As shown in Table 5, the use of O-CRF as part
of H-CRF, improves precision from 73.9% to 79.2%
with only a slight decrease in recall. Overall, F1
improved from 65.2% to 66.2%.
One disadvantage of a stacking-based hybrid sys-
tem is that labeled training data is still required. In
the future, we would like to explore the development
of hybrid systems that leverage Open IE methods,
34
like O-CRF, to reduce the number of training exam-
ples required per relation.
6 Related Work
TEXTRUNNER, the first Open IE system, is part
of a body of work that reflects a growing inter-
est in avoiding relation-specificity during extrac-
tion. Sekine (2006) developed a paradigm for “on-
demand information extraction” in order to reduce
the amount of effort involved when porting IE sys-
tems to new domains. Shinyama and Sekine’s “pre-
emptive” IE system (2006) discovers relationships
from sets of related news articles.
Until recently, most work in RE has been carried
out on a per-relation basis. Typically, RE is framed
as a binary classification problem: Given a sentence
S and a relation R, does S assert R between two
entities in S? Representative approaches include
(Zelenko et al., 2003) and (Bunescu and Mooney,
2005), which use support-vector machines fitted
with language-oriented kernels to classify pairs of
entities. Roth and Yih (2004) also described a
classification-based framework in which they jointly
learn to identify named entities and relations.
Culotta et al. (2006) used a CRF for RE, yet
their task differs greatly from open extraction. RE
was performed from biographical text in which the
topic of each document was known. For every en-
tity found in the document, their goal was to pre-
dict what relation, if any, it had relative to the page
topic, from a set of given relations. Under these re-
strictions, RE became an instance of entity labeling,
where the label assigned to an entity (e.g. Father) is
its relation to the topic of the article.
Others have also found the stacking framework to
yield benefits for IE. Freitag (2000) used linear re-
gression to model the relationship between the con-
fidence of several inductive learning algorithms and
the probability that a prediction is correct. Over
three different document collections, the combined
method yielded improvements over the best individ-
ual learner for all but one relation. The efficacy of
ensemble-based methods for extraction was further
investigated by (Sigletos et al., 2005), who experi-
mented with combining the outputs of a rule-based
learner, a Hidden Markov Model and a wrapper-
induction algorithm in five different domains. Of a
variety ensemble-based methods, stacking proved to
consistently outperform the best base-level system,
obtaining more precise results at the cost of some-
what lower recall. (Feldman et al., 2005) demon-
strated that a hybrid extractor composed of a statis-
tical and knowledge-based models outperform either
in isolation.
7 Conclusions and Future Work
Our experiments have demonstrated the promise of
relation-independent extraction using the Open IE
paradigm. We have shown that binary relationships
can be categorized using a compact set of lexico-
syntactic patterns, and presented O-CRF, a CRF-
based Open IE system that can extract different re-
lationships with a precision of 88.3% and a recall of
45.2%4. Open IE is essential when the number of
relationships of interest is massive or unknown.
Traditional IE is more appropriate for targeted ex-
traction when the number of relations of interest is
small and one is willing to incur the cost of acquir-
ing labeled training data. Compared to traditional
IE, the recall of our Open IE system is admittedly
lower. However, in a targeted extraction scenario,
Open IE can still be used to reduce the number of
hand-labeled examples. As Table 4 shows, numer-
ous hand-labeled examples (ranging from 50 for one
relation to over 3,000 for another) are necessary to
match the precision of O-CRF.
In the future, O-CRF’s recall may be improved
by enhancements to its ability to locate the various
ways in which a given relation is expressed. We also
plan to explore the capacity of Open IE to automati-
cally provide labeled training data, when traditional
relation extraction is a more appropriate choice.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported in part by NSF grants
IIS-0535284 and IIS-0312988, ONR grant N00014-
08-1-0431 as well as gifts from Google, and carried
out at the University of Washington’s Turing Center.
Doug Downey, Stephen Soderland and Dan Weld
provided helpful comments on previous drafts.
4
The TEXTRUNNER Open IE system now indexes extrac-
tions found by O-CRF from millions of Web pages, and is lo-
cated at http://www.cs.washington.edu/research/textrunner
35
References
E. Agichtein and L. Gravano. 2000. Snowball: Ex-
tracting relations from large plain-text collections. In
Procs. of the Fifth ACM International Conference on
Digital Libraries.
M. Banko, M. Cararella, S. Soderland, M. Broadhead,
and O. Etzioni. 2007. Open information extraction
from the web. In Procs. of IJCAI.
S. Brin. 1998. Extracting Patterns and Relations from the
World Wide Web. In WebDB Workshop at 6th Interna-
tional Conference on Extending Database Technology,
EDBT’98, pages 172–183, Valencia, Spain.
R. Bunescu and R. Mooney. 2005. Subsequence kernels
for relation extraction. In In Procs. of Neural Informa-
tion Processing Systems.
R. Bunescu and R. Mooney. 2007. Learning to extract
relations from the web using minimal supervision. In
Proc. of ACL.
A. Culotta and A. McCallum. 2004. Confidence es-
timation for information extraction. In Procs of
HLT/NAACL.
A. Culotta, A. McCallum, and J. Betz. 2006. Integrat-
ing probabilistic extraction models and data mining
to discover relations and patterns in text. In Procs of
HLT/NAACL, pages 296–303.
P. Domingos. 1996. Unifying instance-based and rule-
based induction. Machine Learning, 24(2):141–168.
O. Etzioni, M. Cafarella, D. Downey, S. Kok, A. Popescu,
T. Shaked, S. Soderland, D. Weld, and A. Yates.
2005. Unsupervised named-entity extraction from the
web: An experimental study. Artificial Intelligence,
165(1):91–134.
R. Feldman, B. Rosenfeld, and M. Fresko. 2005. Teg - a
hybrid approach to information extraction. Knowledge
and Information Systems, 9(1):1–18.
D. Freitag. 2000. Machine learning for information
extraction in informal domains. Machine Learning,
39(2-3):169–202.
R. Girju, A. Badulescu, and D. Moldovan. 2006. Au-
tomatic discovery of part-whole relations. Computa-
tional Linguistics, 32(1).
M. Hearst. 1992. Automatic acquisition of hyponyms
from large text corpora. In Procs. of the 14th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Linguistics,
pages 539–545.
D. Klein and C. Manning. 2003. Accurate unlexicalized
parsing. In ACL.
J. Lafferty, A. McCallum, and F. Pereira. 2001. Con-
ditional random fields: Probabilistic models for seg-
menting and labeling sequence data. In Procs. of
ICML.
A. McCallum. 2002. Mallet: A machine learning for
language toolkit. http://mallet.cs.umass.edu.
A. E. Monge and C. P. Elkan. 1996. The field matching
problem: Algorithms and applications. In Procs. of
KDD.
E. Riloff and R. Jones. 1999. Learning Dictionaries for
Information Extraction by Multi-level Boot-strapping.
In Procs. of AAAI-99, pages 1044–1049.
D. Roth and W. Yih. 2004. A linear progamming formu-
lation for global inference in natural language tasks.
In Procs. of CoNLL.
S. Sekine. 2006. On-demand information extraction. In
Proc. of COLING.
Y. Shinyama and S. Sekine. 2006. Preemptive informa-
tion extraction using unrestricted relation discovery.
In Proc. of the HLT-NAACL.
G. Sigletos, G. Paliouras, C. D. Spyropoulos, and M. Hat-
zopoulos. 2005. Combining infomation extraction
systems using voting and stacked generalization. Jour-
nal of Machine Learning Research, 6:1751,1782.
R. Snow, D. Jurafsky, and A. Ng. 2005. Learning syn-
tactic patterns for automatic hypernym discovery. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
17. MIT Press.
K.M. Ting and I. H. Witten. 1999. Issues in stacked gen-
eralization. Artificial Intelligence Research, 10:271–
289.
D. Wolpert. 1992. Stacked generalization. Neural Net-
works, 5(2):241–260.
A. Yates and O. Etzioni. 2007. Unsupervised resolu-
tion of objects and relations on the web. In Procs of
NAACL/HLT.
D. Zelenko, C. Aone, and A. Richardella. 2003. Kernel
methods for relation extraction. JMLR, 3:1083–1106.
B. Zenko and S. Dzeroski. 2002. Stacking with an ex-
tended set of meta-level attributes and mlr. In Proc. of
ECML.
36
