b'Coling 2008: Companion volume  Posters and Demonstrations, pages 36
Manchester, August 2008
Metaphor in Textual Entailment
Rodrigo Agerri
School of Computer Science, University of Birmimgham
B15 2TT Birmingham, UK
r.agerri@cs.bham.ac.uk
Abstract
Metaphor understanding in Computational
Linguistics has largely been focused on the
development of stand-alone prototypes for
which only small-scale evaluations are car-
ried out. This has made difficult the in-
clusion of metaphor in the development
of natural language processing applica-
tions. However, dealing with metaphor
properly is ultimately crucial for any au-
tomated language technology that is to be
truly human-friendly or able to properly
appreciate utterances by humans. This pa-
per proposes to bring metaphor into the
Recognizing Textual Entailment task. By
doing so, the coverage of textual entail-
ment systems would be broadened and
metaphor research would benefit from the
textual entailment evaluation framework.
1 Introduction
Using metaphorical language is common in most
forms of everyday language, from ordinary con-
versation, having ideas in the back of the mind,
through newspaper articles, global oil prices
clung near their highest levels, to scientific ar-
ticles, the variable N goes from 1 to 100.
Metaphor is important in part because it is an
economical and directly appealing way of talking
about many sorts of subject matter in human life,
such as time, money, relationships, emotions, poli-
tics, etc. Most importantly, metaphor can have ma-
jor effects on what can be properly inferred from
an utterance or passage.
c

 2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
Most of the development of natural language
processing (NLP) applications has been focused on
specific tasks such as Information Retrieval (IR)
and Question Answering (QA), largely ignoring
the question of figurative use of language. More-
over, considering the inherent difficulty in evaluat-
ing deep approaches to language in a large-scale
manner, up to date there is not a common eval-
uation framework, corpora or other resources for
metaphor processing. It certainly has not helped
that most of the computational developments on
metaphor processing have largely been stand-alone
systems that are not empirically evaluated on a
large scale (Fass, 1997; Falkenhainer et al., 1989;
Hobbs, 1992; Martin, 1990; Barnden et al., 2003).
This paper proposes to address this by adapting
the Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE) frame-
work for metaphor interpretation. RTE aims to be
an abstract and generic task that captures major se-
mantic inference needs across applications (Dagan
et al., 2007). RTE is considered central for the
development of intelligent yet robust natural lan-
guage processing systems because most of the se-
mantic inference needed in natural language appli-
cations such as QA and IE can be characterized as
problems in RTE (Dagan et al., 2007). Intuitively,
textual entailment consists of determining whether
a hypothesis can be inferred from a given text. The
textual entailment operational definition is a direc-
tional relation between two text fragments, Text T
and Hypothesis H such that T entails H if humans
reading T and considering H will infer that H fol-
lows from T. An illustration can be given by ex-
ample 1560 of the RTE-1 dataset (which involves
a metaphor in the use of incubate):
T: The technological triumph known as GPS
was incubated in the mind of Ivan Getting.
3
\x0cH: Ivan Getting invented the GPS.
As in other NLP applications, figurative language
has merely been noted as problem in the RTE field.
However, we believe that RTE provides a gen-
eral evaluation framework for semantic processing
which can be adapted for the computational test-
ing and evaluation of theories that aim to explain
the semantic inferences involved in metaphor res-
olution. Furthermore, including metaphor in the
RTE task may improve the performance and scope
of textual entailment systems, which in turn may
allow to bring metaphor into the development of
NLP systems.
2 The Role of Metaphor in Textual
Inference
Metaphorical use of language crucially affects the
inferences that can be drawn from a text. Includ-
ing metaphor in textual entailment would amount
to establish whether a hypothesis H can be in-
ferred from a text T, where (at least) T contains
a metaphorical expression whose processing is rel-
evant to judge the entailment.
2.1 Re-formulating the problem
It is usual to assume a view of metaphor under-
standing as involving some notion of properties
and relations of events that are transferred from
a source domain into a target domain. In this
view, a (declarative) metaphorical text conveys in-
formation about some target domain by means of
a number of correspondences between entities in
the source and the target domains. Lakoff and
associates argue that source to target correspon-
dences are part of more general schemes called
conceptual metaphors (Lakoff, 2004) which we
call metaphorical views. For the GPS T-H pair
in the previous section, a metaphorical view such
as MIND AS PHYSICAL SPACE would capture
the correspondence between mind in the source to
special container or incubator in the target.
Most of the computational approaches to
metaphor processing have focused on the develop-
ment of reasoning systems which take a metaphor-
ical expression as input and perform some reason-
ing to prove the correct output  previously given
by the researcher. The difficulties in scaling-up
and the lack of empirical evaluation have been the
main chronic problems of metaphor understanding
systems. Furthermore, a task consisting of provid-
ing an interpretation of a text such as T above 
the GPS being incubated in the mind of Ivan Get-
ting  is very complex because it needs to con-
sider and resolve what the correct interpretation
is from the number of possible interpretations that
can be conveyed by (the use of) incubating. Con-
versely, the task becomes easier if the task faced is
to judge whether H follows from T; in the GPS ex-
ample above, H sets up the context to interpret the
metaphorical expression in T, which in turn would
help to correctly judge that the GPS was invented
by Ivan Getting (incubate can be used instead of
develop, invent, etc.). Thus, a slightly modi-
fied H would presumably lead to connotations of
the metaphorical use of incubate previously not
considered:
T: The technological triumph known as GPS
was incubated in the mind of Ivan Getting.
H: Ivan Getting accidentally invented the
GPS.
A reasonable judgment is that H is not entailed by
T, since an incubation process in this particular ex-
ample would seem to indicate a careful nurturing
of ideas that were brought slowly into life and so
on, within Ivan Gettings mind. The modified H
brings extra connotations of the metaphorical use
of incubate that are crucial to establish the nega-
tive entailment judgment.
2.2 Metaphor in RTE Challenges
Even though annotators aimed to filter out
metaphorical uses of language from the RTE
datasets (Zaenen et al., 2005), some metaphori-
cal texts have eluded the annotators selection poli-
cies (Bos and Markert, 2006). Our study of RTE
datasets looking for pairs in which resolving a
metaphorical expression was relevant for the en-
tailment judgment uncovered few and mostly con-
ventional metaphors. We have focused on 10 pairs
in RTE-1 and 9 in RTE-2. Some of them are listed
here:
T1: Lyon is actually the gastronomic capital of France.
H1: Lyon is the capital of France.
T2: The upper house of the Russian parliament has ap-
proved a controversial bill to tighten state control over
non-governmental organisations (NGOs).
H2: Russian parliament closes NGOs.
T3: Convinced that pro-American officials are in the ascen-
dancy in Tokyo, they talk about turning Japan into the
Britain of the Far East.
4
\x0cH3: Britain is located in the Far East.
T4: Stocks rallied for a second session Thursday, boosted
by falling oil prices and ongoing relief that the presi-
dential election has passed without incident.
H4: The falling oil prices had a positive impact on stocks.
An evaluation of the systems accuracy for the
pairs involving metaphor was performed to test if
there was any significant difference with respect to
the overall accuracy results reported in the official
RTE challenges. The RTE-1 results are not pub-
licly available, so the study is restricted to the 7
runs which were made available  including 4 of
the best 5 systems. Table 1 shows the official over-
all accuracy results and the results of the evaluation
over the 10 pairs involving metaphor:
Author (Group) Overall Metaphor
Bayer (MITRE) 0.586 0.4
Herrera (UNED) 0.566 0.2
0.558 0.2
Bos (Rome/Leeds) 0.563 0.2
0.555 0.1
Newman (Dublin) 0.563 0.1
0.565 0.6
Table 1: RTE-1 Accuracy Comparison.
Although the sample of metaphor pairs is fairly
small, table 1 shows that there is a trend for the ac-
curacy to be significantly lower when metaphor is
involved than for the overall results (which agrees
with Bos and Markerts (2006) diagnostic).
RTE-2 results are publicly available and for this
study 8 runs of the best scoring systems (only
those which also submitted the average precision
results are considered) and 2 with lower accuracy
were chosen. Table 2 confirms the trend sug-
gested by table 1, namely, that the accuracy score
is lower when the judgement depends on process-
ing metaphorical uses of language. How signif-
icant are these results? For the RTE-1 pairs, a
Fishers test of independence establishes that for
5 out of the 7 runs the difference in performance is
statistically significant at the 0.05 level. The same
results were obtained for 7 of the 10 RTE-2 runs
compared in table 2.
3 Discussion
Although only few pairs containing fairly conven-
tional metaphors were uncovered from the RTE
Author (Group) Overall Metaphor
Hickl (LCC) 0.7538 0.4444
Tatu (LCC) 0.7375 0.5555
Zanzotto (Milan/Rome) 0.6388 0.2222
Adams (Dallas) 0.6262 0.3333
Bos (Rome/Leeds) 0.6162 0.1111
Kouylekov (Trento) 0.6050 0.1111
Vanderwende (Stanford) 0.6025 0.1111
Herrera (UNED) 0.5975 0.1111
Clarke (Sussex) 0.5275 0.1111
Newman (Dublin) 0.5250 0.4444
Table 2: RTE-2 Accuracy Comparison.
datasets, the results obtained confirm the hypoth-
esis that the ability to process metaphor would
broaden the coverage of textual entailment sys-
tems, thereby improving their overall performance.
It should also be considered that achieving statisti-
cal significance is harder when the overall results
are not that high, as shown by the fact that we get
statistical significance for Hickls system and not
for Newmans and Adams.
Moreover, it is envisaged that the relatively good
performance of some of the systems (e.g, Hickl
and Tatu) is due to the relative lack of open-ended
metaphors in the pairs used for the analysis. This
also shows that shallow techniques can be fruitful
for processing conventional metaphor. However,
open-ended metaphors may pose more complex
problems. For example, a fairly deep analysis may
presumably be needed to extract the metaphori-
cal connotations conveyed by incubate (about the
source to target transfer of carefully growing and
nurturing) to correctly judged the lack of entail-
ment for the modified hypothesis Ivan Getting ac-
cidentally invented the GPS. This is also true for
metaphors about deepest recesses of the mind
(in RTE-1 dataset), etc. This type of open-ended
metaphors have been subjected to a in-depth anal-
ysis (both formal and computational) within the
ATT-Meta system and approach for metaphor in-
terpretation (Agerri et al., 2007; Barnden et al.,
2003). Adapting it for textual entailment may fa-
cilitate the processing of open-ended metaphor in
a textual entailment task.
Metaphor understanding systems have not
aimed to be empirically evaluated on a large-
scale, but have chosen to focus instead on the in-
depth analysis of small number of examples. As
a consequence, there are not common resources
5
\x0csuch as corpora or shared task evaluation exer-
cises for metaphor resolution. In order to make
use of the RTE evaluation framework to promote
empirically-based research on metaphor under-
standing, the first task would aim to build datasets
that for the first time would allow researchers to
train and (empirically) evaluate their systems. An
obvious strategy would be to follow RTE guide-
lines with the additional requirement that at least T
should contain a metaphorical expression relevant
to judge the entailment.
The RTE evaluation framework has the advan-
tage that it is theory neutral, namely, it does not
depend on any semantic formalism and works on
open domain data. However, the RTE evaluation
framework has the disadvantage of being a black-
box type of evaluation. It makes very difficult to
isolate the semantic task from the task of retriev-
ing the necessary background knowledge (Zaenen
et al., 2005; Bos, 2008). Furthermore, it is not de-
signed to measure performance on specific seman-
tic phenomena, and it is therefore difficult to know
why a system is working correctly or incorrectly.
For example, all but one of the RTE-1 runs stud-
ied incorrectly judged the T1-H1 pair to be true
(about gastronomic capital). It is difficult to be
certain that this was solely due to a lack of ability
to deal with metaphor instead of a problem about
noun modifiers. However, there is not currently a
suitable alternative to RTE semantic evaluation as
trying to isolate the semantic task (e.g., metaphor)
from background knowledge usually results in us-
ing artificial examples. On the bright side, the RTE
framework will allow metaphor research to grapple
more extensively than before with the interactions
between metaphor and other language phenomena.
4 Concluding Remarks
The aim of this paper is two fold: Firstly, it pro-
vides evidence showing that the ability of process-
ing metaphor may improve the performance of tex-
tual inference systems. Secondly, it argues that
RTE may provide a much needed general semantic
framework for common evaluations and computa-
tional testing of theories that aim to explain open-
ended usages of metaphor in everyday text. The
ATT-Meta approach and system to metaphor inter-
pretation may be adapted for this particular task
(Barnden et al., 2003). Including metaphor pro-
cessing in textual entailment systems can also pro-
mote the inclusion of metaphor resolution in NLP
applications such as Question Answering, Docu-
ment Summarization or Information Retrieval.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to the RTE-1 participants that made avail-
able their results. Special thanks to John Barnden
and Alan Wallington for their comments and sug-
gestions.
References
Agerri, R., J.A. Barnden, M.G. Lee, and A.M. Walling-
ton. 2007. Metaphor, inference and domain in-
dependent mappings. In Proceedings of Research
Advances in Natural Language Processing (RANLP
2007), pages 1724, Borovets, Bulgaria.
Barnden, J., S. Glasbey, M. Lee, and A. Wallington.
2003. Domain-transcending mappings in a system
for metaphorical reasoning. In Companion Proceed-
ings of the 10th Conference on the European Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL-03), pages 5761.
Bos, J. and K. Markert. 2006. Recognizing tex-
tual entailment with robust logical inference. In
Quinonero-Candela, J., I. Dagan, B. Magnini, and
F. dAlche Buc, editors, MLCW 2005, volume 3944
of LNAI, pages 404426. Springer-Verlag.
Bos, J. 2008. Lets not argue about semantics. In
Proceedings of the Sixth International Language Re-
sources and Evaluation (LREC08), Marrakech, Mo-
rocco.
Dagan, I., O. Glickman, and B. Magnini. 2007. The
PASCAL Recognising Textual Entailment challenge.
In Quinonero-Candela, J., I. Dagan, B. Magnini, and
F. dAlche Buc, editors, MLCW 2005, volume 3944
of LNAI, pages 177190. Springer-Verlag.
Falkenhainer, B., K.D. Forbus, and D. Gentner. 1989.
The structure-mapping engine: algorithm and exam-
ples. Artificial Intelligence, 41(1):163.
Fass, D. 1997. Processing metaphor and metonymy.
Ablex, Greenwich, Connecticut.
Hobbs, J.R. 1992. Metaphor and abduction. In Ortony,
A., J. Slack, and O. Stock, editors, Communication
from an Artificial Intelligence Perspective, pages 35
58. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Lakoff, G. 2004. Conceptual metaphor home page.
http://cogsci.berkeley.edu/lakoff/MetaphorHome.html.
Martin, J.H. 1990. A computational model of metaphor
interpretation. Academic Press, New York.
Zaenen, A., L. Karttunen, and R. Crouch. 2005. Lo-
cal textual inference: Can it be defined or circum-
scribed? In Proceedings of the ACL 05 Workshop on
Empirical Modelling of Semantic Equivalence and
Entailment, pages 3136.
6
\x0c'