b'Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Computational Linguistics (Coling 2010), pages 725733,
Beijing, August 2010
TimeML Events Recognition and Classification:
Learning CRF Models with Semantic Roles
Hector Llorens, Estela Saquete, Borja Navarro-Colorado
Natural Language Processing Group
University of Alicante
{hllorens,stela,borja}@dlsi.ua.es
Abstract
This paper analyzes the contribution of se-
mantic roles to TimeML event recognition
and classification. For that purpose, an
approach using conditional random fields
with a variety of morphosyntactic features
plus semantic roles features is developed
and evaluated. Our system achieves an
F1 of 81.4% in recognition and a 64.2%
in classification. We demonstrate that the
application of semantic roles improves the
performance of the presented system, es-
pecially for nominal events.
1 Introduction
Event recognition and classification has been
pointed out to be very important to improve com-
plex natural language processing (NLP) applica-
tions such as automatic summarization (Daniel et
al., 2003) and question answering (QA) (Puste-
jovsky, 2002). Natural language (NL) texts often
describe sequences of events in a time line. In the
context of summarization, extracting such events
may aid in obtaining better summaries when these
have to be focused on specific happenings. In
the same manner, the access to such information
is crucial for QA systems attempting to address
questions about events.
The analysis of events as well as the classifica-
tion of the different forms they adopt in NL text is
not a new issue (Vendler, 1967). It relates not only
to linguistics but different scientific areas such as
philosophy, psychology, etc.
In NLP, different definitions of event can be
found regarding the target application.
On the one hand, in topic detection and track-
ing (Allan, 2002), event is defined as an instance
of a topic identified at document level describing
something that happen (e.g., wars). The aim of
this task is to cluster documents on the same topic,
that is to say, the same event.
On the other hand, information extraction (IE)
provides finer granularity event definitions. IE
proposes standard schemes to annotate the indi-
vidual events within the scope of a document.
STAG scheme (2000) was aimed to identify events
in news and their relationship with points in a tem-
poral line. More recently, TimeML (Pustejovsky
et al., 2003a) presented a rich specification for an-
notating events in NL text extending the features
of the previous one.
This paper is focused on the TimeML view of
events. TimeML defines events as situations that
happen or occur, or elements describing states
or circumstances in which something obtains or
holds the truth. These events are generally ex-
pressed by tensed or untensed verbs, nominaliza-
tions, adjectives, predicative clauses or preposi-
tional phrases. TimeML guidelines define seven
classes of events:
 Reporting. Action of a person or organization declar-
ing or narrating an event (e.g., say)
 Perception. Physical perception of another event (e.g.,
see, hear)
 Aspectual. Aspectual predication of another event
(e.g., start, continue)
 I Action. Intensional action (e.g., try)
 I State. Intensional state (e.g., feel, hope)
 State. Circumstance in which something holds the
truth (e.g., war, in danger)
 Occurrence. Events that describe things that happen
(e.g., erupt, arrive)
The following sentence shows an example of an
occurrence event and a state event.
Its <EVENT class="OCCURRENCE">turning</EVENT>
out to be another <EVENT class="STATE">bad</EVENT>
financial week.
725
\x0cThe automatic annotation of events has been
addressed with different data-driven approaches.
Current approaches are mainly based on mor-
phosyntactic information. Our hypothesis is that
semantic roles, as higher language level analysis
information, may be useful as additional feature
to improve the performance of such approaches.
Within this setting, the main objective of this
paper is to analyze (1) the contribution of seman-
tic roles, as additional feature, and (2) the influ-
ence of conditional random fields (CRFs), as ma-
chine learning (ML) technique, in the events auto-
matic recognition and classification task.
This paper is structured as follows. Firstly,
related work in the task is reviewed in Section
2. The next section provides a detailed descrip-
tion of our proposal to address event recognition
and classification. After that, Section 4 includes
an evaluation of the proposal, and a comparative
analysis of the results. Finally, conclusions are
drawn in Section 5.
2 Related Work
There is only one corpus available annotated with
TimeML events: TimeBank (Pustejovsky et al.,
2003b). Hence, all the approaches regarding
TimeML events extraction have been evaluated
using this corpus.
EVITA system (Saur et al., 2005) recognizes
events by combining linguistic and statistical tech-
niques. The main features used to manually
encode event recognition rules are the follow-
ing: part-of-speech (PoS) tagging, lemmatizing,
chunking, lexical lookup and contextual pars-
ing. Furthermore, WordNet information com-
bined with Bayesian learned disambiguation was
used to identify nominal events. EVITA obtained
74.03% precision, 87.31% recall, and 80.12%
F=1 in event recognition over TimeBank.
Boguraev and Ando (2005) present an evalu-
ation on automatic TimeML events annotation.
They set out the task as a classification prob-
lem and used a robust risk minimization (RRM)
classifier to solve it. The F=1 results obtained
by a 5-fold cross validation over TimeBank were
78.6% for recognition and 61.3% for classifica-
tion. Moreover, they evaluated the impact of ap-
plying word-profiling techniques over their ap-
proach to exploit unannotated data. Using this ad-
ditional information, the F=1 results improved to
80.3% and 64.0%. In this evaluation, neither pre-
cision nor recall were given.
STEP (Bethard and Martin, 2006) is a system
for TimeML event recognition and classification.
This approach uses a rich set of textual, morpho-
logical, dependency and WordNet hypernymy fea-
tures to build a Support Vector Machine (SVM)
model. The model was trained using 9/10 of the
TimeBank. The test, carried out using the remain-
ing 1/10 of the corpus, obtained a 82.0% preci-
sion, 70.6% recall and 75.9% F=1 for recognition
and a 66.7% precision, 51.2% recall and 57.9%
F=1 for classification.
Finally, March and Baldwin (2008) present an
evaluation on event recognition using a multi-
class classifier (BSVM). The main features used
to train the classifier are word and PoS context
window, stop words removal and feature general-
ization through words grouping (numbers, named
entities, etc.). The result for the best feature com-
bination in a 10-fold cross validation over Time-
Bank was 76.4% F=1.
It is worth mentioning that there are two ver-
sions of the TimeBank corpus, 1.1 and 1.2. The
latest version is the current gold standard. Both
versions consist of the same documents1, mainly
news articles and transcribed broadcast news from
different domains. EVITA is the only reference
which used TimeBank 1.2 while the rest of re-
viewed references used TimeBank 1.1.
3 Our proposal: semantic roles
enhancing a CRF model
In this section, the motivation for our proposal,
and our specific approach are presented.
3.1 Motivation
The next two subsections describe the main
feature (semantic roles) and the ML algorithm
(CRFs) we selected to address event recognition
and classification; and the reasons why we think
they could be useful in that task.
1
Except 3 documents removed in TimeBank 1.2
726
\x0c3.1.1 Semantic roles
Semantic role labeling (SRL) has achieved im-
portant results in the last years (Gildea and Juraf-
sky, 2002). For each predicate in a sentence, se-
mantic roles identify all constituents, determining
their arguments (agent, patient, etc.) and their ad-
juncts (locative, temporal, etc.). Currently, there
exist different role sets aimed to cover opposed re-
quirements. They range from more specific, such
as FrameNet (Baker et al., 1998), to more general
like PropBank (Palmer et al., 2005). Figure 1 il-
lustrates a semantic role labeled sentence.
Figure 1: Semantic roles example
Many research efforts into the application of se-
mantic roles demonstrated that this information is
useful for different NLP purposes (Melli et al.,
2006). Focusing on TimeML, semantic roles have
been applied to temporal expressions recognition
(Llorens et al., 2009), and temporal links classi-
fication (Hagege and Tannier, 2007). However,
they have not been used to recognize and classify
TimeML events.
Semantic roles provide structural relations of
the predicates in which events may participate.
Beyond syntactic relations expressed by means of
the different types of phrases, semantic roles give
further information about semantic relations be-
tween the arguments of a predicate. Therefore,
as richer information, roles may better distinguish
tokens to be candidate events. In addition, differ-
ent semantic role settings may represent specific
event classes.
Example 1 shows four sentences annotated with
PropBank semantic roles (in square brackets) in
which the noun control participates. In the sen-
tences 1 and 2, control does not represent an
event, while in the sentences 3 and 4, it repre-
sents an state event. It can be seen that the noun
control, when it is contained by A1 role it may
represent an event. However, it is not an event
when contained by A0 or AM-MNR roles. The
analysis may also take into account the governing
verb. In the example, we could specify that con-
trol represents an event when contained by A1
role of seek and obtain verbs; and the oppo-
site for the A0 role of emerge and the AM-MNR
of had.
(1) 1. [Control procedures A0] will emerge
2. [Iraq A0] had [thousands of Americans A1] [under
its control AM-MNR]
3. [Crane Co. A0] may obtain [control of Milton Roy
Corp. A1]
4. [Pattisons A0] decided to seek [control A1]
Our hypothesis is that semantic roles, as ad-
ditional information, may help in the recogni-
tion and classification of events. The information
about the role of a token and the verb it depends
on, or the set of roles of the sentence, could be
useful for determining whether a token or a se-
quence of tokens is an event or not. Due to the
fact that roles represent high level information in
NL text, they are more independent from word to-
kens. Hence, roles may aid in learning more gen-
eral models that could improve the results of ap-
proaches focused on lower level information.
3.1.2 CRF probabilistic model
Conditional Random Fields is a popular and ef-
ficient ML technique for supervised sequence la-
beling (Lafferty et al., 2001). CRFs are undirected
graphical models, a special case of conditionally-
trained finite state machines. A key advantage of
CRFs is their flexibility to include a wide variety
of arbitrary, non-independent features of the input.
We see the task set out in this paper as a se-
quence labeling problem. Assume X is a random
variable over data sequences to be labeled, and Y
is a random variable over the corresponding label
sequences (hidden), being all Y components (Yi)
members of a finite label alphabet . X might
range over NL sentences and Y range over event
annotations of those sentences, with  the set of
possible event IOB22 labels. The following ex-
ample illustrates the event recognition problem.
(2) X Y
was ?
another ? B-EVENT
bad ? ? = I-EVENT
week ? O
2
IOB2 format: (B)egin, (I)nside, and (O)utside
727
\x0cThe variables X and Y are jointly distributed
over both label and observation sequences. How-
ever, unlike Hidden Markov Models (generative)
in which p(X, Y ), CRFs (discriminative) con-
struct a conditional model from paired observa-
tion and label sequences: p(Y |X). Graphically,
CRFs are represented by undirected graphs, G =
(V, E) such that Y = (Yv), v \x03 V , so that Y is
indexed by the vertices of G. Then (X, Y ) is a
conditional random field if Yv variables obey the
Markov property with respect to the graph when
conditioned on X:
P(Yv|X, Yw, v \x02= w) = P(Yv|X, Yw, v  w),
where v  w means that Yv and Yw are connected
neighbors in G.
To extend the problem to event classification,
the alphabet  must be extended with the event
classes (state, aspectual, etc.).
CRFs have been successfully applied to many
sequence labeling tasks (Sha and Pereira, 2003;
McCallum and Li, 2003).
From our point of view, the task addressed in
this paper is well suited for this ML technique.
Events may depend on structural properties of NL
sentences. Not only the word sequence, but mor-
phological, syntactic and semantic information is
related with the event structure (Tenny and Puste-
jovsky, 2000).
For example, sequences of verbs may represent
i action+occurrence or aspectual+occurrence
events (see Example 3).
(3) The president will <EVENT class="i action"> try
</EVENT> to <EVENT class="occurrence"> assist
</EVENT> to the <EVENT class="occurrence">
conference </EVENT>
Saddam will <EVENT class="aspectual"> begin
</EVENT> <EVENT class="occurrence"> withdrawing
</EVENT> troops from Iranian territory on Friday
In addition, for instance, many state event in-
stances are represented by to be plus a variable
quality (see Example 4).
(4) It is <EVENT class="occurrence"> turning
</EVENT> out to be another <EVENT class="state">
bad </EVENT> financial week.
Given this analysis, our hypothesis is that CRFs
will be useful in the recognition of events in which
the sequential and structural properties are rele-
vant.
3.2 Approach description
This paper proposes CRFs as learning method
to infer an event recognition and classification
model. Our system includes CRF++ toolkit3 for
training and testing our approach. The learning
process was done using CRF-L2 algorithm and
hyper-parameter C=1.
The definition of the features is crucial for the
architecture of the system. The features used in
our approach are grouped in two feature sets. On
the one hand, general features, which comprise
morphosyntactic and ontological information. On
the other hand, semantic roles features, which are
the main focus of this paper.
The general features used to train our CRF
model are described regarding each language
analysis level.
 Morphological: The lemma and PoS con-
text, in a 5-window (-2,+2), was employed.
This basic linguistic feature showed good re-
sults in different NLP tasks, as well as in
event recognition and classification (March
and Baldwin, 2008). Tokenization, PoS and
lemmatization were obtained using TreeTag-
ger (Schmid, 1994).
 Syntactic: Different events are contained in
particular types of phrases and syntactic de-
pendencies. This feature tries to tackle this
by considering syntactic information. Char-
niak parser (Charniak and Johnson, 2005)
was used to obtain the syntactic tree.
 Lexical semantics: WordNet (Fellbaum,
1998) top ontology classes have been widely
used to represent word meaning at ontologi-
cal level, and demonstrated its worth in many
tasks. We obtained the four top classes for
each word.
The specific semantic roles features used to en-
hance the training framework of the CRF model
were developed considering PropBank role set.
PropBank was applied in our system due to the
high coverage it offers in contrast to FrameNet.
In order to get PropBank semantic roles, the CCG
3
http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/
728
\x0cSRL tool (Punyakanok et al., 2004) was used for
labeling the corpus.
 Role: For each token, we considered the role
regarding the verb the token depends on. Se-
mantic roles information may be useful for
distinguish particular lemmas that are events
only when appearing under a precise role.
 Governing verb: The verb to which the cur-
rent token holds a particular role. This may
distinguish tokens appearing under the influ-
ence of different verbs.
 Role+verb combination: The previous two
features were combined to capture the rela-
tion between them. This introduces new clas-
sification information by distinguishing roles
depending on different verbs. The impor-
tance of this falls especially on the numbered
roles of PropBank (A0, A1, ...) holding dif-
ferent meanings when depending on different
verbs.
 Role configuration: This consists of the set
of roles depending on the verb the token de-
pends on. This may be particularly useful
for distinguish different sentence settings and
thus, whether a token denotes an event in a
particular sentence type.
The system consists of two main processes.
Firstly, given TimeML annotated text, it obtains
the defined features plus the IOB2 tags of the an-
notated events. Then, using this data the system
learns (trains) a model for event recognition and
a model for event classification. Secondly, given
plain text, it automatically gets the defined fea-
tures using the described tools. With this data,
the system applies the learned models to recog-
nize and classify TimeML events.
4 Evaluation
In this section, firstly, the corpus, criteria and mea-
sures are defined. Secondly, the results obtained
by our approach are presented. After that, the con-
tribution of our approach is measured through dif-
ferent experiments: (1) general contribution, (2)
semantic roles contribution, and (3) CRFs contri-
bution. And finally, our approach is compared to
the state of the art systems.
4.1 Corpus, criteria and measures
For the evaluation, the TimeBank 1.2 corpus
(7881 events) was used without modification. All
the results reported in this evaluation were ob-
tained using a 5-fold cross validation. The n-fold
train-test sets were built sorting the corpus files
alphabetically and then sequentially select each
set regarding the documents size. It is important
to highlight the latter because if the n-folds were
made regarding the number of documents, the sets
had not been homogeneous due to the differences
in TimeBank document sizes.
Only annotations matching the exact event span
were considered as correct in recognition and
classification, requiring also the class matching in
the second case.
The following measures were used to score the
evaluated approaches.
 Precision correct annotations
total approach annotations
 Recall correct annotation
total corpus annotations
 F=1
2  precision  recall
precision + recall
4.2 Our approach results
Table 1 shows the results obtained by our ap-
proach for both recognition and classification of
events. The last column (BF) indicates the best
F=1 results obtained in the individual folds.
Precision Recall F=1 BF
Recognition 83.43 79.54 81.40 82.43
Classification 68.84 60.15 64.20 69.68
Table 1: Our approach (CRF+Roles) results
The results show a high F=1 score in both
recognition and classification, showing a good
balance between precision and recall. This indi-
cates that our approach is appropriate to address
this task.
Focusing on classification task, Table 2 shows
the detailed scores for each event class.
Looking at the specific class results, reporting
obtained the best results. This is due to the fact
that 80% of reporting events are represented by
lemmas say and report with PoS VBD and
VBZ. Occurrence, perception, aspectual and
i state obtained classification results over 50%.
729
\x0cClass (instances) Precision Recall F=1
Reporting (1021) 91.90 89.18 90.51
Perception (48) 65.93 66.83 66.37
Aspectual (258) 81.35 47.00 59.57
I Action (673) 51.40 29.30 37.32
I State (582) 68.44 43.70 53.34
State (1107) 50.01 24.84 33.19
Occurrence (4192) 66.73 72.07 69.29
Table 2: CRF+Roles 5-fold detailed results
Although perception and aspectual are quite re-
stricted to some lemmas, they obtained results be-
low reporting. This is due to the fact that Time-
Bank contains very few examples of these classes.
I action and state show poorer results. In the
case of the former, this is because some non-
intensional verbs (e.g., look) appear in the cor-
pus as i action under certain conditions, for exam-
ple, when there is modality or these verbs appear
in conditional sentences. This suggests the neces-
sity of incorporating a word sense disambiguation
(WSD) technique. Our approach did not take into
account this information and thus the results are
lower for this event class. In the case of state, the
reasons for the low performance are the richness
of this event class by means of lemmas, PoS, and
phrases.
Finally, Table 3 shows the results of our ap-
proach by word class.
Precision Recall F=1
Verb 91.56 92.15 91.33
Recognition Noun 72.67 48.26 58.42
Adj. 66.78 38.09 48.35
Verb 73.86 74.21 73.51
Classification Noun 62.73 41.33 49.53
Adj. 55.69 31.12 40.41
Table 3: CRF+Roles 5-fold word class results
It may be seen that the best results in both
recognition and classification are obtained in verb
events, followed by noun and adjective.
4.3 Contribution analysis
This subsection details the contribution of each as-
pect of our approach through three comparative
experiments.
First experiment: general contribution
This experiment measures the general contribu-
tion of our approach by comparing its results with
a baseline. TimeBank was analyzed to find a ba-
sic general rule to annotate events. The events are
mainly denoted by verbs, pertaining to occurrence
class. Hence, we propose a baseline that annotates
all verbs as occurrence events. Table 4 shows re-
sults obtained by this baseline for both recognition
and classification of events.
Prec. Recall F=1
Our approach Recog. 83.43 79.54 81.40
Class. 68.84 60.15 64.20
Baseline Recog. 72.50 65.20 68.60
Class. 46.01 53.19 49.34
Table 4: Our approach vs Baseline results
Given the simplicity of the baseline, the results
obtained are quite high. However, our approach
F=1 significantly improves baseline by 19% for
recognition and 30% for classification.
Second experiment: roles contribution
The main objective of this paper is to determine
the impact of semantic roles in this task. To quan-
tify it, a non-roles version of our approach was
evaluated. This version only uses the general fea-
tures described in section 3. Table 5 shows the
results obtained.
Precision Recall F=1
Our approach Recog. 83.43 79.54 81.40
Class. 68.84 60.15 64.20
Non-roles Recog. 82.96 74.81 78.67
Class. 67.53 54.80 60.50
Table 5: Our approach vs Non-roles results
Comparing these results with the ones obtained
by our full featured approach, the application
of roles improved especially the recall. Specifi-
cally, recall improved by 6% and 10% for recog-
nition and classification respectively. The main
improvement was achieved by state and occur-
rence classes (60% of the total improvement), es-
pecially, nominal events of that classes that con-
centrate around the 70% of the total contribution.
To illustrate corpus examples that have been
improved by roles, Example 5 shows two sen-
tences containing state events that were correctly
tagged by the roles approach and missed by the
730
\x0cnon-roles. In the examples, the TimeML events
annotation and below the semantic roles annota-
tion is reported.
(5) There are still few buyers and the mood is <EVENT
class=STATE>gloomy</EVENT>
[There A0] are [still AM-TMP] [few buyers A1] and [the
mood A0] is [gloomy AM-MNR]
Security is now <EVENT>better</EVENT>
[Security A0] is [now AM-TMP] [better AM-MNR]
In these cases, AM-MNR role information lead to
a correct state event recognition.
Third experiment: CRFs contribution
In order to measure the CRFs contribution to this
task, an extra experiment was carried out. This
consisted of comparing, under the same setting,
CRFs with a popular learning technique: support
vector machines (SVM). As in Bethard and Mar-
tin (2006), YamCha4 software was used (parame-
ters: C=1 and polynomial degree=2).
Table 6 shows the results obtained by the SVM-
based approach in recognition and Table 7 reports
the improvement (CRFs over SVM) distribution
in the different word classes.
Precision Recall F=1
Our approach (CRF) 83.43 79.54 81.40
SVM 80.00 75.10 77.40
Table 6: Our approach (CRF) vs SVM results
Verb Noun Adj. Adv. Prep.
General 22% 71% 5% 1% 1%
Table 7: CRF improvement distribution among
the word classes
These results verify that CRF improves SVM
F=1 by 5% in this task. Furthermore, especially
noun events take advantage of using CRF.
Finally, Figure 2 illustrates the results of our ap-
proach over the described experiments.
4.4 Comparison with the state of the art
Most systems found in the literature are data-
driven approaches using morphosyntactic fea-
tures. SVM based approaches (Bethard and Mar-
tin, 2006; March and Baldwin, 2008) achieved,
4
http://chasen.org/ taku/software/YamCha/
Figure 2: F=1 Results
approximately, 76% and 58% F=1 in event
recognition and classification respectively. Bogu-
raev and Ando (2005) used a robust risk mini-
mization classifier to address this task and ob-
tained 78.6% and 61% (without exploiting unan-
notated data). These results are very similar to the
ones obtained by our non-roles approach. This
suggests that using, apart from morphosyntactic
features, additional features based on semantic
roles could improve the approaches.
EVITA system (Saur et al., 2005) combines
linguistic and statistical techniques. On the one
hand, it consists of a set of manually encoded rules
based on morphosyntactic information. On the
other hand, it includes a Bayesian learned disam-
biguation module to identify nominal events. The
later was trained and tested using the whole cor-
pus, therefore, the results could be inflated by this
fact. For that reason, Bethard and Martin (2006)
presented an EVITA implementation (Sim-Evita)
to compare the results. Sim-Evita obtains an 73%
and 51% F=1 in event recognition and classifica-
tion respectively. These results suggest that data-
driven improve rule-based approaches.
Only STEP evaluation showed detailed classifi-
cation results. We agree that state events are the
most complex and heterogeneous ones. Focus-
ing on such events, our F=1 results (33%) im-
prove Bethards (25%) by 32%. Regarding the
results obtained for each word class. Bethards
results presented good performance on classify-
ing verb events (71%), but lower results in noun
events (34%). Our approach results for noun
events (49%) improve theirs by 44%. This sug-
gests that the application of semantic roles en-
ables our approach on making more general pre-
dictions. In this manner, our system may recog-
731
\x0cnize unseen nominal event instances as long as
they share, with the seen instances, some semantic
roles features.
5 Conclusions and Further Work
This paper presented an approach for the recogni-
tion and classification of TimeML events consist-
ing of a CRF model learned using semantic roles
as main feature. In addition to morphosyntactic
features, the model was enhanced including ex-
tra semantic information, semantic role labeling,
used for other applications with satisfactory re-
sults, but never employed before for this purpose.
Our proposal was evaluated using the gold stan-
dard corpus, TimeBank 1.2, and the results ob-
tained were analyzed and compared to measure
the impact of both semantic roles and CRFs in the
described task.
The obtained F=1 results demonstrated that
semantic roles are useful to recognize (81.43%)
and classify (64.20%) TimeML events, improv-
ing the presented baseline by 19% for recogni-
tion and 30% for classification. Specifically, Se-
mantic roles employed as additional feature im-
proved the recall of the non-roles version by 6%
and 10% for recognition and classification respec-
tively. This indicates that roles features led to
more general models capable of better annotat-
ing unseen instances. The roles contribution was
more significant in state and occurrence classes of
noun events, concentrating around the 70% of the
improvement.
Furthermore, it was verified that CRFs achieve
higher results than models learned using other
ML techniques such as SVM (5% improvement),
contributing especially to nominal events. This
demonstrated that CRF models are appropriate to
face the task.
Finally, to the extent our results are compara-
ble to state of the art evaluations, ours outper-
form the F=1 scores in both recognition and clas-
sification. Especially, our approach showed bet-
ter performance than related works in state (32%
improvement) and nominal events (44% improve-
ment). Hence, the extension of the current ap-
proaches with semantic roles features could bene-
fit their performance.
The main difficulties found in the task ad-
dressed in this paper are related to i action and
state events. In the former, we detected that
modality and the word senses are important and
must be treated to distinguish such events. In
the later, although they were improved by our
approach, state events are still the most com-
plex class of events due to their richness in con-
trast to the reduced size of the training data. We
agree with related literature that event classifi-
cation results are still below other tasks perfor-
mance, which indicates that this task is inherently
complex and more training data may lead to sig-
nificant improvements.
As further work we propose, firstly, improv-
ing the i action results by taking into account the
modality considering the AM-MOD role, and the
word senses using a WSD technique. Secondly,
the application of FrameNet role set (finer granu-
larity) to determine which kind of roles are better
to improve the current event annotation systems.
Acknowledgments
This paper has been supported by the Spanish
Government, projects TIN-2006-15265-C06-01, TIN-
2009-13391-C04-01 and PROMETEO/2009/119, where
Hector Llorens is funded (BES-2007-16256).
References
Allan, James. 2002. Topic Detection and Tracking:
Event-Based Information Organization. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, USA.
Baker, Collin F., Charles J. Fillmore, and John B.
Lowe. 1998. The Berkeley FrameNet Project. In
COLING-ACL, pages 8690.
Bethard, Steven and James H. Martin. 2006. Identi-
fication of event mentions and their semantic class.
In EMNLP: Proceedings of the Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in NLP, pages 146154. ACL.
Boguraev, Branimir and Rie Kubota Ando. 2005. Ef-
fective Use of TimeBank for TimeML Analysis. In
Annotating, Extracting and Reasoning about Time
and Events 05151.
Charniak, Eugene and Mark Johnson. 2005. Coarse-
to-fine n-best parsing and maxent discriminative
reranking. In 43rd Annual Meeting of the ACL.
Daniel, Naomi, Dragomir Radev, and Timothy Allison.
2003. Sub-event based multi-document summariza-
732
\x0ction. In HLT-NAACL Text summarization workshop,
pages 916. ACL.
Fellbaum, Christiane. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic
Lexical Database (Language, Speech, and Commu-
nication). MIT Press.
Gildea, Daniel and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic
labeling of semantic roles. Computational Linguis-
tics, 28(3):245288.
Hagege, Caroline and Xavier Tannier. 2007. XRCE-
T: XIP temporal module for TempEval campaign.
In TempEval (SemEval), pages 492495, Prague,
Czech Republic. ACL.
Lafferty, John D., Andrew McCallum, and Fernando
C. N. Pereira. 2001. Conditional random fields:
Probabilistic models for segmenting and labeling
sequence data. In Proceedings of the 18th ICML,
pages 282289. Morgan Kaufmann.
Llorens, Hector, Borja Navarro, and Estela Saquete.
2009. Using Semantic Networks to Identify Tem-
poral Expressions from Semantic Roles. In VI
RANLP, pages 219224.
March, Olivia and Timothy Baldwin. 2008. Auto-
matic event reference identification. In ALTA 2008,
pages 7987, Australia.
McCallum, Andrew and Wei Li. 2003. Early results
for named entity recognition with conditional ran-
dom fields, feature induction and web-enhanced lex-
icons. In HLT-NAACL, pages 188191.
Melli, G., Y. Liu Z. Shi, Y. Wang, and F. Popowich.
2006. Description of SQUASH, the SFU Question
Answering Summary Handler for the DUC-2006
Summarization Task. In DUC.
Palmer, Martha, Daniel Gildea, and Paul Kingsbury.
2005. The Proposition Bank: An Annotated Corpus
of Semantic Roles. Computational Linguistics, 31.
Punyakanok, Vasin, Dan Roth, W. Yih, D. Zimak, and
Y. Tu. 2004. Semantic role labeling via generalized
inference over classifiers. In HLT-NAACL (CoNLL),
pages 130133. ACL.
Pustejovsky, James, Jose M. Castano, Robert Ingria,
Roser Saur, Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, and
Graham Katz. 2003a. TimeML: Robust Specifica-
tion of Event and Temporal Expressions in Text. In
IWCS-5.
Pustejovsky, James, Patrik Hanks, Roser Saur, A. See,
Robert Gaizauskas, Andrea Setzer, Dragomir R.
Radev, Beth Sundheim, David Day, Lisa Ferro, and
M. Lazo. 2003b. The TIMEBANK Corpus. In Cor-
pus Linguistics, pages 647656.
Pustejovsky, James. 2002. TERQAS: Time and Event
Recognition for Question Answering Systems. In
ARDA Workshop.
Saur, Roser, Robert Knippen, Marc Verhagen, and
James Pustejovsky. 2005. Evita: A robust event
recognizer for qa systems. In HLT/EMNLP. ACL.
Schmid, Helmut. 1994. Probabilistic part-of-speech
tagging using decision trees. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on New Methods in Lan-
guage Processing, pages 4449.
Setzer, Andrea and Robert Gaizauskas. 2000.
Annotating Events and Temporal Information in
Newswire Texts. In LREC 2000, pages 12871294.
Sha, Fei and Fernando C. N. Pereira. 2003. Shal-
low parsing with conditional random fields. In HLT-
NAACL.
Tenny, Carol and James Pustejovsky. 2000. Events as
Grammatical Objects. The Converging Perspectives
of Lexical Semantics and Syntax. CSLI.
Vendler, Zeno, 1967. Linguistics and philosophy,
chapter Verbs and times, pages 97121. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca, NY.
733
\x0c'