b'TnT -- A Statistical Part-of-Speech Tagger
Thorsten Brants
Saarland University
Computational Linguistics
D-66041 Saarbriicken, Germany
thorst en@coli, uni-sb, de
Abstract
Trigrams\'n\'Tags (TnT) is an efficient statistical
part-of-speech tagger. Contrary to claims found
elsewhere in the literature, we argue that a tagger
based on Markov models performs at least as well as
other current approaches, including the Maximum
Entropy framework. A recent comparison has even
shown that TnT performs significantlybetter for the
tested corpora. We describe the basic model of TnT,
the techniques used for smoothing and for handling
unknown words. Furthermore, we present evalua-
tions on two corpora.
1 Introduction
A large number of current language processing sys-
tems use a part-of-speech tagger for pre-processing.
The tagger assigns a (unique or ambiguous) part-of-
speech tag to each token in the input and passes its
output to the next processing level, usually a parser.
Furthermore, there is a large interest in part-of-
speech tagging for corpus annotation projects, who
create valuable linguistic resources by a combination
of automatic processing and human correction.
For both applications, a tagger with the highest
possible accuracy is required. The debate about
which paradigm solves the part-of-speech tagging
problem best is not finished. Recent comparisons
of approaches that can be trained on corpora (van
Halteren et al., 1998; Volk and Schneider, 1998) have
shown that in most cases statistical aproaches (Cut-
ting et al., 1992; Schmid, 1995; Ratnaparkhi, 1996)
yield better results than finite-state, rule-based, or
memory-based taggers (Brill, 1993; Daelemans et al.,
1996). They are only surpassed by combinations of
different systems, forming a "voting tagger".
Among the statistical approaches, the Maximum
Entropy framework has a very strong position. Nev-
ertheless, a recent independent comparison of 7 tag-
gets (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999) has shown that
another approach even works better: Markov mod-
els combined with a good smoothing technique and
with handling of unknown words. This tagger, TnT,
not only yielded the highest accuracy, it also was the
fastest both in training and tagging.
The tagger comparison was organized as a "black-
box test": set the same task to every tagger and
compare the outcomes. This paper describes the
models and techniques used by TnT together with
the implementation.
The reader will be surprised how simple the under-
lying model is. The result of the tagger comparison
seems to support the maxime "the simplest is the
best". However, in this paper we clarify a number
of details that are omitted in major previous pub-
lications concerning tagging with Markov models.
As two examples, (Rabiner, 1989) and (Charniak
et al., 1993) give good overviews of the techniques
and equations used for Markov models and part-of-
speech tagging, but they are not very explicit in the
details that are needed for their application. We ar-
gue that it is not only the choice of the general model
that determines the result of the tagger but also the
various "small" decisions on alternatives.
The aim of this paper is to give a detailed ac-
count of the techniques used in TnT. Additionally,
we present results of the tagger on the NEGRA cor-
pus (Brants et al., 1999) and the Penn Treebank
(Marcus et al., 1993). The Penn Treebank results
reported here for the Markov model approach are
at least equivalent to those reported for the Maxi-
mum Entropy approach in (Ratnaparkhi, 1996). For
a comparison to other taggers, the reader is referred
to (Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999).
2 Architecture
2.1 The Underlying Model
TnT uses second order Markov models for part-of-
speech tagging. The states of the model represent
tags, outputs represent the words. Transition prob-
abilities depend on the states, thus pairs of tags.
Output probabilities only depend on the most re-
cent category. To be explicit, we calculate
argmax P(tilti-1, ti-2)P(wilti P(tr+l ItT)
ti...iT
(i)
for a given sequence of words w I . . . W T of length T.
tl... tT are elements of the tagset, the additional
224
\x0ctags t-l, to, and tT+l are beginning-of-sequence
and end-of-sequence markers. Using these additional
tags, even if they stem from rudimentary process-
ing of punctuation marks, slightly improves tagging
results. This is different from formulas presented
in other publications, which just stop with a "loose
end" at the last word. If sentence boundaries are
not marked in the input, TnT adds these tags if it
encounters one of [.!?;] as a token.
Transition and output probabilities are estimated
from a tagged corpus. As a first step, we use the
maximum likelihood probabilities /5 which are de-
rived from the relative frequencies:
Unigrams: /5(t3) = f(t3) (2)
N
f(t2, t3) (3)
Bigrams: P(t31t~)= f(t2)
f(ta, t2, t3)
Trigrams: /5(t3ltx,t~) - f(tl,t2) (4)
Lexical: /5(w3 It3) - /(w3, t3) (5)
f(t3)
for all tl, t2, t3 in the tagset and w3 in the lexi-
con. N is the total number of tokens in the training
corpus. We define a maximum likelihood probabil-
ity to be zero if the corresponding nominators and
denominators are zero. As a second step, contex-
tual frequencies are smoothed and lexical frequences
are completed by handling words that are not in the
lexicon (see below).
2.2 Smoothing
Trigram probabilities generated from a corpus usu-
ally cannot directly be used because of the sparse-
data problem. This means that there are not enough
instances for each trigram to reliably estimate the
probability. Furthermore, setting a probability to
zero because the corresponding trigram never oc-
cured in the corpus has an undesired effect. It causes
the probability of a complete sequence to be set to
zero if its use is necessary for a new text sequence,
thus makes it impossible to rank different sequences
containing a zero probability.
The smoothing paradigm that delivers the best
results in TnT is linear interpolation of unigrams,
bigrams, and trigrams. Therefore, we estimate a
trigram probability as follows:
P(t3ltl, t2) = AlP(t3) + Ag_/5(t31t2)+ A3/5(t3[t1, t2)
(6)
/5 are maximum likelihood estimates of the proba-
bilities, and A1 + A2 + A3 = 1, so P again represent
probability distributions.
We use the context-independent variant of linear
interpolation, i.e., the values of the As do not depend
on the particular trigram. Contrary to intuition,
this yields better results than the context-dependent
variant. Due to sparse-data problems, one cannot es-
timate a different set of As for each trigram. There-
fore, it is common practice to group trigrams by fre-
quency and estimate tied sets of As. However, we
are not aware of any publication that has investi-
gated frequency groupings for linear interpolation in
part-of-speech tagging. All groupings that we have
tested yielded at most equivalent results to context-
independent linear interpolation. Some groupings
even yielded worse results. The tested groupings
included a) one set of As for each frequency value
and b) two classes (low and high frequency) on the
two ends of the scale, as well as several groupings
in between and several settings for partitioning the
classes.
The values of Ax, A2, and A3 are estimated by
deleted interpolation. This technique successively
removes each trigram from the training corpus and
estimates best values for the As from all other n-
grams in the corpus. Given the frequency counts
for uni-, bi-, and trigrams, the weights can be very
efficiently determined with a processing time linear
in the number of different trigrams. The algorithm
is given in figure 1. Note that subtracting 1 means
taking unseen data into account. Without this sub-
traction the model would overfit the training data
and would generally yield worse results.
2.3 Handling of Unknown Words
Currently, the method of handling unknown words
that seems to work best for inflected languages is
a suffix analysis as proposed in (Samuelsson, 1993).
Tag probabilities are set according to the word\'s end-
ing. The suffix is a strong predictor for word classes,
e.g., words in the Wall Street Journal part of the
Penn Treebank ending in able are adjectives (JJ) in
98% of the cases (e.g. fashionable, variable), the rest
of 2% are nouns (e.g. cable, variable).
The probability distribution for a particular suf-
fix is generated from all words in the training set
that share the same suffix of some predefined max-
imum length. The term suffix as used here means
"final sequence of characters of a word" which is not
necessarily a linguistically meaningful suffix.
Probabilities are smoothed by successive abstrac-
tion. This calculates the probability of a tag t
given the last m letters li of an n letter word:
P(tlln-r,+l,...ln). The sequence of increasingly
more general contexts omits more and more char-
acters of the suffix, such that P(tlln_m+2,...,ln),
P(t[ln-m+3,...,l~), ..., P(t) are used for smooth-
ing. The recursiou formula is
P(tll,_i+l, . . . ln)
= P(tlln-i+l,... In) + OiP(tll~-,..., ln) (7)
1 +0~
225
\x0cset )%1 ----)%2 = )%3 = 0
foreach trigram tl,t2,t3 with f(tl,t2,t3) > 0
depending on the maximum of the following three values:
f(tl ,t2,ts)-- 1
case f(h,t2)-I " increment )%3 by f(tl,t2,t3)
f(t2,t3)-I
case f(t2)-I " increment )%2 by f(tl,t2,ts)
f(t3)--i
case N-1 " increment )%1 by f(tl,t2,t3)
end
end
normalize )%1,
)%2,)%3
Figure 1: Algorithm for calculting the weights for context-independent linear interpolation )%1,)%2,)%3 when
the n-gram frequencies are known. N is the size of the corpus If the denominator in one of the expressions
is 0, we define the result of that expression to be 0.
for i = m... 0, using the maximum likelihood esti-
mates/5 from frequencies in the lexicon, weights Oi
and the initialization
P(t) =/5(t). (8)
The maximum likelihood estimate for a suffix of
length i is derived from corpus frequencies by
P(ti/~-i+l, .. l~) = f(t, 1~-~+1,... l~)
 (9)
For the Markov model, we need the inverse condi-
tional probabilities P(/,-i+l,... lnlt) which are ob-
tained by Bayesian inversion.
A theoretical motivated argumentation uses the
standard deviation of the maximum likelihood prob-
abilities for the weights 0i (Samuelsson, 1993)
This leaves room for interpretation.
1) One has to identify a good value for m, the
longest suffix used The approach taken for TnT is
the following: m depends on the word in question.
We use the longest suffix that we can find in the
training set (i.e., for which the frequency is greater
than or equal to 1), but at most 10 characters. This
is an empirically determined choice
2) We use a context-independent approach for 0i,
as we did for the contextual weights )%i. It turned
out to be a good choice to set all 0i to the standard
deviation of the unconditioned maximum likelihood
probabilities of the tags in the training corpus, i.e.,
we set
1
$
Oi = ~--~(/5(tj) - 15)2 (10)
s 1
j=l
for all i = 0... m - 1, using a tagset of s tags and
the average
$
/5 = 1 ~/5(tj) (11)
8
j----I
This usually yields values in the range 0.03 ... 0.10.
3) We use different estimates for uppercase and
lowercase words, i.e., we maintain two different suffix
tries depending on the capitalization of the word.
This information improves the tagging results
4) Another freedom concerns the choice of the
words in the lexicon that should be used for suf-
fix handling. Should we use all words, or are some
of them better suited than others? Accepting that
unknown words are most probably infrequent, one
can argue that using suffixes of infrequent words in
the lexicon is a better approximation for unknown
words than using suffixes of frequent words. There-
fore, we restrict the procedure of suffix handling to
words with a frequency smaller than or equal to some
threshold value. Empirically, 10 turned out to be a
good choice for this threshold.
2.4 Capitalization
Additional information that turned out to be use-
ful for the disambiguation process for several cor-
pora and tagsets is capitalization information. Tags
are usually not informative about capitalization, but
probability distributions of tags around capitalized
words are different from those not capitalized. The
effect is larger for English, which only capitalizes
proper names, and smaller for German, which capi-
talizes all nouns.
We use flags ci that are true if wi is a capitalized
word and false otherwise These flags are added to
the contextual probability distributions. Instead of
P(tsItl,t2) (12)
we use
P(t3, c3[tl , cl, t2, c2) (13)
and equations (3) to (5) are updated accordingly.
This is equivalent to doubling the size of the tagset
and using different tags depending on capitalization.
226
\x0c2.5 Beam Search
The processing time of the Viterbi algorithm (Ra-
biner, 1989) can be reduced by introducing a beam
search. Each state that receives a 5 value smaller
than the largest 5 divided by some threshold value
is excluded from further processing. While the
Viterbi algorithm is guaranteed to find the sequence
of states with the highest probability, this is no
longer true when beam search is added. Neverthe-
less, for practical purposes and the right choice of
0, there is virtually no difference between the algo-
rithm with and without a beam. Empirically, a value
of 0 = 1000 turned out to approximately double the
speed of the tagger without affecting the accuracy.
The tagger currently tags between 30~000 and
60,000 tokens per second (including file I/O) on a
Pentium 500 running Linux. The speed mainly de-
pends on the percentage of unknown words and on
the average ambiguity rate.
3 Evaluation
We evaluate the tagger\'s performance under several
aspects. First of all, we determine the tagging ac-
curacy averaged over ten iterations. The overall ac-
curacy, as well as separate accuracies for known and
unknown words are measured.
Second, learning curves are presented, that indi-
cate the performance when using training corpora of
different sizes, starting with as few as 1,000 tokens
and ranging to the size of the entire corpus (minus
the test set).
An important characteristic of statistical taggers
is that they not only assign tags to words but also
probabilities in order to rank different assignments.
We distinguish reliable from unreliable assignments
by the quotient of the best and second best assign-
ments 1. All assignments for which this quotient is
larger than some threshold are regarded as reliable,
the others as unreliable. As we will see below, accu-
racies for reliable assignments are much higher.
The tests are performed on partitions of the cor-
pora that use 90% as training set and 10% as test
set, so that the test data is guaranteed to be unseen
during training. Each result is obtained by repeat-
ing the experiment 10 times with different partitions
and averaging the single outcomes.
In all experiments, contiguous test sets are used.
The alternative is a round-robin procedure that puts
every 10th sentence into the test set. We argue that
contiguous test sets yield more realistic results be-
cause completely unseen articles are tagged. Using
the round-robin procedure, parts of an article are al-
ready seen, which significantly reduces the percent-
age of unknown words. Therefore, we expect even
1By definition, this quotient is co if there is only one pos-
sible tag for a given word.
higher results when testing on every 10th sentence
instead of a contiguous set of 10%.
In the following, accuracy denotes the number of
correctly assigned tags divided by the number of to-
kens in the corpus processed. The tagger is allowed
to assign exactly one tag to each token.
We distinguish the overall accuracy, taking into
account all tokens in the test corpus, and separate
accuracies for known and unknown tokens. The lat-
ter are interesting, since usually unknown tokens are
much more difficult to process than known tokens,
for which a list of valid tags can be found in the
lexicon.
3.1 Tagging the NEGRA corpus
The German NEGRA corpus consists of 20,000 sen-
tences (355,000 tokens) of newspaper texts (Frank-
furter Rundschau) that are annotated with parts-of-
speech and predicate-argument structures (Skut et
al., 1997). It was developed at the Saarland Univer-
sity in Saarbrficken2. Part of it was tagged at the
IMS Stuttgart. This evaluation only uses the part-
of-speech annotation and ignores structural annota-
tions.
Tagging accuracies for the NEGRA corpus are
shown in table 2.
Figure 3 shows the learning curve of the tagger,
i.e., the accuracy depending on the amount of train-
ing data. Training length is the nmnber of tokens
used for training. Each training length was tested
ten times, training and test sets were randomly cho-
sen and disjoint, results were averaged. The training
length is given on a logarithmic scale.
It is remarkable that tagging accuracy for known
words is very high even for very small training cot-
pora. This means that we have a good chance of
getting the right tag if a word is seen at least once
during training. Average percentages of unknown
tokens are shown in the bottom line of each diagram.
We exploit the fact that the tagger not only de-
termines tags, but also assigns probabilities. If there
is an alternative that has a probability "close to"
that of the best assignment, this alternative can be
viewed as almost equally well suited. The notion of
"close to" is expressed by the distance of probabil-
ities, and this in turn is expressed by the quotient
of probabilities. So, the distance of the probabili-
ties of a best tag tbest and an alternative tag tart
is expressed by P(tbest)/p(tau), which is some value
greater or equal to 1 since the best tag assignment
has the highest probability.
Figure 4 shows the accuracy when separating as-
signments with quotients larger and smaller than
the threshold (hence reliable and unreliable assign-
ments). As expected, we find that accuracies for
2Foravailability, please check
h~tp ://w~. col i.uni-sb, de/sfb378/negra-corpus
777
227
\x0cTable 2: Part-of-speech tagging accuracy for the NEGRA corpus, averaged over 10 test runs, training and
test set are disjoint. The table shows the percentage of unknown tokens, separate accuracies and standard
deviations for known and unknown tokens, as well as the overall accuracy.
percentage
unknowns
NEGRA corpus 11.9%
known
ace.
97.7% 0.23
unknown
acc. (x
89.0% 0.72
overall
aCE. o"
96.7% 0.29
NEGRA Corpus: POS Learning Curve
100
9O
80
70 /S
6O
50 , i
1 2 5
50.8 46.4 41.4
I i i I I I i
10 20 50 100 200 320 500
36.0 30.7 23.0 18.3 14.3 11.911).3
Overall
min =78.1%
max=96.7%
e Known
rain =95.7%
max=97.7%
---a--- Unknown
rain =61.2%
max=89.0%
I
1000 x 1000 Training Length
St avg. percentage unknown
Figure 3: Learning curve for tagging the NEGRA corpus. The training sets of variable sizes as well as test
sets of 30,000 tokens were randomly chosen. Training and test sets were disjoint, the procedure was repeated
10 times and results were averaged. Percentages of unknowns for 500k and 1000k training are determined
from an untagged extension.
NEGRA Corpus: Accuracy of reliable assignments
100
99
98
97
A
f "
/
:. Reliable
rain =96.7%
max=99.4%
96 I i i i i i i i i i i
2 5 10 20 50 100 500 2000 10000 threshold 0
100 97.9 95.1 92.7 90.3 86.8 84.1 81.0 76.1 71.9 68.3 64.1 62.0 % cases reliable
- 53.5 62.9 69.6 74.5 79.8 82.7 85.2 88.0 89.6 90.8 91.8 92.2 acc. of complement
Figure 4: Tagging accuracy for the NEGRA corpus when separating reliable and unreliable assignments. The
curve shows accuracies for reliable assignments. The numbers at the bottom line indicate the percentage of
reliable assignments and the accuracy of the complement set (i.e., unreliable assignments).
228
\x0cTable 5: Part-of-speech tagging accuracy for the Penn Treebank. The table shows the percentage of unknown
tokens, separate accuracies and standard deviations for known and unknown tokens, as well as the overall
accuracy.
I percentage known
unknowns acc. a
Penn Treebank 2.9% 97.0% 0.15
unknown
aCC. O"
85.5% 0.69
overall
aCE. O"
96.7% 0.15
100
9O
80
70
<
60
Penn Treebank: POS Learning Curve
/
50 I I ~ i I I I i I
1 2 5 10 20 50 100 200 500
50.3 42.8 33.4 26.8 20.2 13.2 9.8 7.0 4.4
Overall
rain =78.6%
max=96.7%
Known
rain =95.2%
max=97.0%
Unknown
min =62.2%
max=85.5%
I
1000  1000 Training Length
2.9 avg. percentage unknown
Figure 6: Learning curve for tagging the Penn Treebank. The training sets of variable sizes as well as test sets
of 100,000 tokens were randomly chosen. Training and test sets were disjoint, the procedure was repeated
10 times and results were averaged.
Penn Treebank: Accuracy of reliable assignments
100
99
98
97
Overall
rain =96.6%
max=99.4%
96 i i i i t i i i i i i i
2 5 10 20 50 100 500 2000 10000 threshold 0
100 97.7 94.6 92.2 89.8 86.3 83.5 80.4 76.6 73.8 71.0 67.2 64.5 % cases reliable
- 53.5 62.8 68.9 73.9 79.3 82.6 85.2 87.5 88.8 89.8 91.0 91.6 acc. of complement
Figure 7: Tagging accuracy for the Penn Treebank when separating reliable and unreliable assignments. The
curve shows accuracies for reliable assignments. The numbers at the bottom line indicate the percentage of
reliable assignments and the accuracy of the complement set.
229
\x0creliable assignments are much higher than for unre-
liable assignments. This distinction is, e.g., useful
for annotation projects during the cleaning process,
or during pre-processing, so the tagger can emit mul-
tiple tags if the best tag is classified as unreliable.
3.2 Tagging the Penn Treebank
We use the Wall Street Journal as contained in the
Penn Treebank for our experiments. The annotation
consists of four parts: 1) a context-free structure
augmented with traces to mark movement and dis-
continuous constituents, 2) phrasal categories that
are annotated as node labels, 3) a small set of gram-
matical functions that are annotated as extensions to
the node labels, and 4) part-of-speech tags (Marcus
et al., 1993). This evaluation only uses the part-of-
speech annotation.
The Wall Street Journal part of the Penn Tree-
bank consists of approx. 50,000 sentences (1.2 mil-
lion tokens).
Tagging accuracies for the Penn Treebank are
shown in table 5. Figure 6 shows the learning curve
of the tagger, i.e., the accuracy depending on the
amount of training data. Training length is the num-
ber of tokens used for training. Each training length
was tested ten times. Training and test sets were
disjoint, results are averaged. The training length is
given on a logarithmic scale. As for the NEGRA cor-
pus, tagging accuracy is very high for known tokens
even with small amounts of training data.
We exploit the fact that the tagger not only de-
termines tags, but also assigns probabilities. Figure
7 shows the accuracy when separating assignments
with quotients larger and smaller than the threshold
(hence reliable and unreliable assignments). Again,
we find that accuracies for reliable assignments are
much higher than for unreliable assignments.
3.3 Summary of Part-of-Speech Tagging
Results
Average part-of-speech tagging accuracy is between
96% and 97%, depending on language and tagset,
which is at least on a par with state-of-the-art re-
sults found in the literature, possibly better. For
the Penn Treebank, (Ratnaparkhi, 1996) reports an
accuracy of 96.6% using the Maximum Entropy ap-
proach, our much simpler and therefore faster HMM
approach delivers 96.7%. This comparison needs to
be re-examined, since we use a ten-fold crossvalida-
tion and averaging of results while Ratnaparkhi only
makes one test run.
The accuracy for known tokens is significantly
higher than for unknown tokens. For the German
newspaper data, results are 8.7% better when the
word was seen before and therefore is in the lexicon,
than when it was not seen before (97.7% vs. 89.0%).
Accuracy for known tokens is high even with very
small amounts of training data. As few as 1000 to-
kens are sufficient to achieve 95%-96% accuracy for
them. It is important for the tagger to have seen a
word at least once during training.
Stochastic taggers assign probabilities to tags. We
exploit the probabilities to determine reliability of
assignments. For a subset that is determined during
processing by the tagger we achieve accuracy rates
of over 99%. The accuracy of the complement set is
much lower. This information can, e.g., be exploited
in an annotation project to give an additional treat-
ment to the unreliable assignments, or to pass se-
lected ambiguities to a subsequent processing step.
4 Conclusion
We have shown that a tagger based on Markov mod-
els yields state-of-the-art results, despite contrary
claims found in the literature. For example, the
Markov model tagger used in the comparison of (van
Halteren et al., 1998) yielded worse results than all
other taggers. In our opinion, a reason for the wrong
claim is that the basic algorithms leave several deci-
sions to the implementor. The rather large amount
of freedom was not handled in detail in previous pub-
lications: handling of start- and end-of-sequence, the
exact smoothing technique, how to determine the
weights for context probabilities, details on handling
unknown words, and how to determine the weights
for unknown words. Note that the decisions we made
yield good results for both the German and the En-
glish Corpus. They do so for several other corpora
as well. The architecture remains applicable to a
large variety of languages.
According to current tagger comparisons (van
Halteren et al., 1998; Zavrel and Daelemans, 1999),
and according to a comparsion of the results pre-
sented here with those in (Ratnaparkhi, 1996), the
Maximum Entropy framework seems to be the only
other approach yielding comparable results to the
one presented here. It is a very interesting future
research topic to determine the advantages of either
of these approaches, to find the reason for their high
accuracies, and to find a good combination of both.
TnT is freely available to universities and re-
lated organizations for research purposes (see
http ://www. coli. uni-sb, de/-thorsten/tnt).
Acknowledgements
Many thanks go to Hans Uszkoreit for his sup-
port during the development of TnT. Most of the
work on TnT was carried out while the author
received a grant of the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft in the Graduiertenkolleg Kognitionswis-
senschaft Saarbriicken. Large annotated corpora are
the pre-requisite for developing and testing part-of-
speech taggers, and they enable the generation of
high-quality language models. Therefore, I would
230
\x0clike to thank all the people who took the effort
to annotate the Penn Treebank, the Susanne Cor-
pus, the Stuttgarter Referenzkorpus, the NEGRA
Corpus, the Verbmobil Corpora, and several others.
And, last but not least, I would like to thank the
users of TnT who provided me with bug reports and
valuable suggestions for improvements.
References
Thorsten Brants, Wojciech Skut, and Hans Uszko-
reit. 1999. Syntactic annotation of a German
newspaper corpus. In Proceedings of the ATALA
Treebank Workshop, pages 69-76, Paris, France.
Eric Brill. 1993. A Corpus-Based Approach to Lan-
guage Learning. Ph.D. Dissertation, Department
of Computer and Information Science, University
of Pennsylvania.
Eugene Charniak, Curtis Hendrickson, Neil Ja-
cobson, and Mike Perkowitz. 1993. Equations
for part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings of the
Eleventh National Con[erence on Artificial In-
telligence, pages 784-789, Menlo Park: AAAI
Press/MIT Press.
Doug Cutting, Julian Kupiec, Jan Pedersen, and
Penelope Sibun. 1992. A practical part-of-speech
tagger. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference
on Applied Natural Language Processing (ACL),
pages 133-140.
Walter Daelemans, Jakub Zavrel, Peter Berck, and
Steven Gillis. 1996. Mbt: A memory-based part
of speech tagger-generator. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Very Large Corpora, Copenhagen,
Denmark.
Mitchell Marcus, Beatrice Santorini, and Mary Ann
Marcinkiewicz. 1993. Building a large annotated
corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Compu-
tational Linguistics, 19(2):313-330.
Lawrence R. Rabiner. 1989. A tutorial on Hid-
den Markov Models and selected applications in
speech recognition. In Proceedings o] the IEEE,
volume 77(2), pages 257-285.
Adwait Ratnaparkhi. 1996. A maximum entropy
model for part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings
o] the Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing EMNLP-96, Philadel-
phia, PA.
Christer Samuelsson. 1993. Morphological tag-
ging based entirely on Bayesian inference. In
9th Nordic Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics NODALIDA-93, Stockholm University,
Stockholm, Sweden.
Helmut Schmid. 1995. Improvements in part-of-
speech tagging with an application to German.
In Helmut Feldweg and Erhard Hinrichts, editors,
Lexikon und Text. Niemeyer, Tfibingen.
Wojciech Skut, Brigitte Krenn, Thorsten Brants,
and Hans Uszkoreit. 1997. An annotation scheme
for free word order languages. In Proceedings of
the Fifth Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing ANLP-97, Washington, DC.
Hans van Halteren, Jakub Zavrel, and Walter Daele-
mans. 1998. Improving data driven wordclass tag-
ging by system combination. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics COLING-98, pages 491-497, Montreal,
Canada.
Martin Volk and Gerold Schneider. 1998. Compar-
ing a statistical and a rule-based tagger for ger-
man. In Proceedings of KONVENS-98, pages 125-
137, Bonn.
Jakub Zavrel and Walter Daelemans. 1999. Eval-
uatie van part-of-speech taggers voor bet cor-
pus gesproken nederlands. CGN technical report,
Katholieke Universiteit Brabant, Tilburg.
231
\x0c'