b'Playing the Telephone Game: Determining the Hierarchical Structure of
Perspective and Speech Expressions
Eric Breck and Claire Cardie
Department of Computer Science
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
USA
ebreck,cardie@cs.cornell.edu
Abstract
News articles report on facts, events, and opin-
ions with the intent of conveying the truth.
However, the facts, events, and opinions appear-
ing in the text are often known only second-
or third-hand, and as any child who has played
telephone knows, this relaying of facts often
garbles the original message. Properly under-
standing the information filtering structures that
govern the interpretation of these facts, then, is
critical to appropriately analyzing them. In this
work, we present a learning approach that cor-
rectly determines the hierarchical structure of
information filtering expressions 78.30% of the
time.
1 Introduction
Newswire text has long been a primary target for
natural language processing (NLP) techniques such
as information extraction, summarization, and ques-
tion answering (e.g. MUC (1998); NIS (2003);
DUC (2003)). However, newswire does not offer
direct access to facts, events, and opinions; rather,
journalists report what they have experienced, and
report on the experiences of others. That is, facts,
events, and opinions are filtered by the point of
view of the writer and other sources. Unfortu-
nately, this filtering of information through multiple
sources (and multiple points of view) complicates
the natural language interpretation process because
the reader (human or machine) must take into ac-
count the biases introduced by this indirection. It
is important for understanding both newswire and
narrative text (Wiebe, 1994), therefore, to appropri-
ately recognize expressions of point of view, and to
associate them with their direct and indirect sources.
This paper introduces two kinds of expression
that can filter information. First, we define a per-
spective expression to be the minimal span of text
that denotes the presence of an explicit opinion,
evaluation, emotion, speculation, belief, sentiment,
etc.1 Private state is the general term typically used
1
Note that implicit expressions of perspective, i.e. Wiebe et
to refer to these mental and emotional states that
cannot be directly observed or verified (Quirk et al.,
1985). Further, we define the source of a perspec-
tive expression to be the experiencer of that private
state, that is, the person or entity whose opinion
or emotion is being conveyed in the text. Second,
speech expressions simply convey the words of an-
other individual  and by the choice of words, the
reporter filters the original sources intent. Consider
for example, the following sentences (in which per-
spective expressions are denoted in bold, speech ex-
pressions are underlined, and sources are denoted in
italics):
1. Charlie was angry at Alices claim that Bob was
unhappy.
2. Philip Clapp, president of the National Environ-
ment Trust, sums up well the general thrust of the
reaction of environmental movements: There is no
reason at all to believe that the polluters are sud-
denly going to become reasonable.
Perspective expressions in Sentence 1 describe the
emotions or opinion of three sources: Charlies
anger, Bobs unhappiness, and Alices belief. Per-
spective expressions in Sentence 2, on the other
hand, introduce the explicit opinion of one source,
i.e. the reaction of the environmental movements.
Speech expressions also perform filtering in these
examples. The reaction of the environmental move-
ments is filtered by Clapps summarization, which,
in turn, is filtered by the writers choice of quotation.
In addition, the fact that Bob was unhappy is filtered
through Alices claim, which, in turn, is filtered by
the writers choice of words for the sentence. Sim-
ilarly, it is only according to the writer that Charlie
is angry.
The specific goal of the research described here
is to accurately identify the hierarchical structure of
perspective and speech expressions (pses) in text.2
al.s (2003) expressive subjective elements are not the subject
of study here.
2
For the rest of this paper, then, we ignore the distinction
between perspective and speech expressions, so in future ex-
\x0cGiven sentences 1 and 2 and their pses, for exam-
ple, we will present methods that produce the struc-
tures shown in Figure 1, which represent the multi-
stage information filtering that should be taken into
account in the interpretation of the text.
Sentence 1:
writers implicit speech event
claim
unhappy
angry
Sentence 2:
writers implicit speech event
sums up
reaction
Figure 1: Hierarchical structure of the perspective and
speech expressions in sentences 1 and 2
We propose a supervised machine learning ap-
proach to the problem that relies on a small set
of syntactically-based features. More specifically,
the method first trains a binary classifier to make
pairwise parent-child decisions among the pses in
the same sentence, and then combines the deci-
sions to determine their global hierarchical struc-
ture. We compare the approach to two heuristic-
based baselines  one that simply assumes that ev-
ery pse is filtered only through the writer, and a
second that is based on syntactic dominance rela-
tions in the associated parse tree. In an evaluation
using the opinion-annotated NRRC corpus (Wiebe
et al., 2002), the learning-based approach achieves
an accuracy of 78.30%, significantly higher than
both the simple baseline approach (65.57%) and the
parse-based baseline (71.64%). We believe that this
study provides a first step towards understanding the
multi-stage filtering process that can bias and garble
the information present in newswire text.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We
present related work in Section 2 and describe the
machine learning approach in Section 3. The ex-
perimental methodology and results are presented
in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. Section 6 summa-
rizes our conclusions and plans for future work.
2 The Larger Problem and Related Work
This paper addresses the problem of identifying the
hierarchical structure of perspective and speech ex-
pressions. We view this as a necessary and im-
portant component of a larger perspective-analysis
amples, both types of pse appear in boldface. Note that the
acronym pse has been used previously with a different mean-
ing (Wiebe, 1994).
pse class count
writer 9808
verb 7623
noun 2293
no parse 278
adjective 197
adverb 50
other 370
Table 1: Breakdown of classes of pses. writer de-
notes pses with the writer as source. No parse denotes
pses in sentences where the parse failed, and so the part
of speech could not be determined.
number of pses number of sentences
1 3612
2 3256
3 1810
4 778
5 239
>5 113
Table 2: Breakdown of number of pses per sentence
system. Such a system would be able to identify
all pses in a document, as well as identify their
structure. The system would also identify the direct
source of each pse. Finally, the system would iden-
tify the text corresponding to the content of a private
state or the speech expressed by a pse.3 Such a sys-
tem might analyze sentence 2 as follows:
(source: writer
pse: (implicit speech event)
content: Philip ... reasonable.)
(source: clapp
pse: sums up
content: There ... reasonable.)
(source: environmental movements
pse: reaction
content: (no text))
As far as we are aware, no single system ex-
ists that simultaneously solves all these problems.
There is, however, quite a bit of work that addresses
various pieces of this larger task, which we will now
survey.
Gerard (2000) proposes a computational model
of the reader of a news article. Her model provides
for multiple levels of hierarchical beliefs, such as
the nesting of a primary sources belief within that
of a reporter. However, Gerard does not provide al-
gorithms for extracting this structure directly from
newswire texts.
Bethard et al. (2004) seek to extract propositional
3
In (Wiebe, 2002), this is referred to as the inside.
\x0copinions and their holders. They define an opinion
as a sentence, or part of a sentence that would an-
swer the question How does X feel about Y?  A
propositional opinion is an opinion localized in the
propositional argument of certain verbs, such as
believe or realize. Their task then corresponds
to identifying a pse, its associated direct source, and
the content of the private state. However, they con-
sider as pses only verbs, and further restrict atten-
tion to verbs with a propositional argument, which
is a subset of the perspective and speech expressions
that we consider here. Table 1, for example, shows
the diversity of word classes that correspond to pses
in our corpus. Perhaps more importantly for the
purposes of this paper, their work does not address
information filtering issues, i.e. problems that arise
when an opinion has been filtered through multiple
sources. Namely, Bethard et al. (2004) do not con-
sider sentences that contain multiple pses, and do
not, therefore, need to identify any indirect sources
of opinions. As shown in Table 2, however, we
find that sentences with multiple non-writer pses
(i.e. sentences that contain 3 or more total pses)
comprise a significant portion (29.98%) of our cor-
pus. An advantage over our work, however, is that
Bethard et al. (2004) do not require separate solu-
tions to pse identification and the identification of
their direct sources.
Automatic identification of sources has also
been addressed indirectly by Gildea and Jurafskys
(2002) work on semantic role identification in that
finding sources often corresponds to finding the
filler of the agent role for verbs. Their methods then
might be used to identify sources and associate them
with pses that are verbs or portions of verb phrases.
Whether their work will also apply to pses that are
realized as other parts of speech is an open question.
Wiebe (1994), studies methods to track the
change of point of view in narrative text (fiction).
That is, the writer of one sentence may not corre-
spond to the writer of the next sentence. Although
this is not as frequent in newswire text as in fiction,
it will still need to be addressed in a solution to the
larger problem.
Bergler (1993) examines the lexical semantics of
speech event verbs in the context of generative lex-
icon theory. While not specifically addressing our
problem, the semantic dimensions of reporting
verbs that she extracts might be very useful as fea-
tures in our approach.
Finally, Wiebe et al. (2003) present preliminary
results for the automatic identification of perspec-
tive and speech expressions using corpus-based
techniques. While the results are promising (66% F-
was
Charlie angry
at
claim
s
Alice
that
was
Bob unhappy
Figure 2: Dependency parse of sentence 1 according to
the Collins parser.
measure), the problem is still clearly unsolved. As
explained below, we will instead rely on manually
tagged pses for the studies presented here.
3 The Approach
Our task is to find the hierarchical structure among
the pses in individual sentences. Ones first im-
pression might be that this structure should be ob-
vious from the syntax: one pse should filter an-
other roughly when it dominates the other in a de-
pendency parse. This heuristic, for example, would
succeed for claim and unhappy in sentence 1,
whose pse structure is given in Figure 1 and parse
structure (as produced by the Collins parser) in Fig-
ure 2. 4
Even in sentence 1, though, we can see that
the problem is more complex: angry dominates
claim in the parse tree, but does not filter it. Un-
fortunately, an analysis of the parse-based heuristic
on our training data (the data set will be described
in Section 4), uncovered numerous, rather than just
a few, sources of error. Therefore, rather than trying
to handcraft a more complex collection of heuris-
tics, we chose to adopt a supervised machine learn-
ing approach that relies on features identified in this
analysis. In particular, we will first train a binary
classifier to make pairwise decisions as to whether
a given pse is the immediate parent of another. We
then use a simple approach to combine these de-
cisions to find the hierarchical information-filtering
structure of all pses in a sentence.
We assume that we have a training corpus of
4
For this heuristic and the features that follow, we will speak
of the pses as if they had a position in the parse tree. However,
since pses are often multiple words, and do not necessarily
form a constituent, this is not entirely accurate. The parse node
corresponding to a pse will be the highest node in the depen-
dency parse corresponding to a word in the pse. We consider
the writers implicit pse to correspond to the root of the parse.
\x0csentences, annotated with pses and their hier-
archical pse structure (Section 4 describes the
corpus). Training instances for the binary clas-
sifier are pairs of pses from the same sentence,
hpsetarget, pseparenti5. We assign a class value
of 1 to a training instance if pseparent is the
immediate parent of psetarget in the manually
annotated hierarchical structure for the sentence,
and 0 otherwise. For sentence 1, there are nine
training instances generated: hclaim, writeri,
hangry, writeri, hunhappy, claimi (class 1),
hclaim, angryi, hclaim, unhappyi, hangry, claimi,
hangry, unhappyi, hunhappy, writeri,
hunhappy, angryi (class 0). The features used
to describe each training instance are explained
below.
During testing, we construct the hierarchical pse
structure of an entire sentence as follows. For each
pse in the sentence, ask the binary classifier to judge
each other pse as a potential parent, and choose the
pse with the highest confidence6. Finally, join these
immediate-parent links to form a tree.7
One might also try comparing pairs of potential
parents for a given pse, or other more direct means
of ranking potential parents. We chose what seemed
to be the simplest method for this first attempt at the
problem.
3.1 Features
Here we motivate and describe the 23 features used
in our model. Unless otherwise stated, all features
are binary (1 if the described condition is true, 0
otherwise).
Parse-based features (6). Based on the perfor-
mance of the parse-based heuristic, we include a
pseparent-dominates-psetarget feature in our feature
set. To compensate for parse errors, however, we
also include a variant of this that is 1 if the parent of
pseparent dominates psetarget.
Many filtering expressions filter pses that occur
in their complements, but not in adjuncts. There-
fore, we add variants of the previous two syntax-
based features that denote whether the parent node
5
We skip sentences where there is no decision to make (sen-
tences with zero or one non-writer pse). Since the writer pse is
the root of every structure, we do not generate instances with
the writer pse in the psetarget position.
6
There is an ambiguity if the classifier assigns the same con-
fidence to two potential parents. For evaluation purposes, we
consider the classifiers response incorrect if any of the highest-
scoring potential parents are incorrect.
7
The directed graph resulting from flawed automatic pre-
dictions might not be a tree (i.e. it might be cyclic and discon-
nected). Since this occurs very rarely (5 out of 9808 sentences
on the test data), we do not attempt to correct any non-tree
graphs.
dominates psetarget, but only if the first dependency
relation is an object relation.
For similar reasons, we include a feature calculat-
ing the domination relation based on a partial parse.
Consider the following sentence:
3. He was criticized more than recognized for his
policy.
One of criticized or recognized will be the root
of this dependency parse, thus dominating the other,
and suggesting (incorrectly) that it filters the other
pse. Because a partial parse does not attach all con-
stituents, such spurious dominations are eliminated.
The partial parse feature is 1 for fewer instances
than pseparent-dominates-psetarget, but it is more
indicative of a positive instance when it is 1.
So that the model can adjust when the parse is
not present, we include a feature that is 1 for all
instances generated from sentences on which the
parser failed.
Positional features (5). Forcing the model to de-
cide whether pseparent is the parent of psetarget
without knowledge of the other pses in the sen-
tence is somewhat artificial. We therefore include
several features that encode the relative position of
pseparent and psetarget in the sentence. Specifi-
cally, we add a feature that is 1 if pseparent is the
root of the parse (and similarly for psetarget ). We
also include a feature giving the ordinal position of
pseparent among the pses in the sentence, relative
to psetarget (-1 means pseparent is the pse that im-
mediately precedes psetarget, 1 means immediately
following, and so forth). To allow the model to vary
when there are more potential parents to choose
from, we include a feature giving the total number
of pses in the sentence.
Special parents and lexical features (6). Some
particular pses are special, so we specify indicator
features for four types of parents: the writer pse,
and the lexical items said (the most common non-
writer pse) and according to. According to is
special because it is generally not very high in the
parse, but semantically tends to filter everything else
in the sentence.
In addition, we include as features the part of
speech of pseparent and psetarget (reduced to noun,
verb, adjective, adverb, or other), since intuitively
we expected distinct parts of speech to behave dif-
ferently in their filtering.
Genre-specific features (6). Finally, journalistic
writing contains a few special forms that are not al-
ways parsed accurately. Examples are:
4. Alice disagrees with me, Bob argued.
\x0c5. Charlie, she noted, dislikes Chinese food.
The parser may not recognize that noted and
argued should dominate all other pses in sen-
tences 4 and 5, so we attempt to recognize when
a sentence falls into one of these two patterns.
For hdisagrees, arguedi generated from sentence 4,
features pseparent-pattern-1 and psetarget-pattern-
1 would be 1, while for hdislikes, notedi generated
from sentence 5, feature pseparent-pattern-2 would
be 1. We also add features that denote whether the
pse in question falls between matching quote marks.
Finally, a simple feature indicates whether pseparent
is the last word in the sentence.
3.2 Resources
We rely on a variety of resources to generate our fea-
tures. The corpus (see Section 4) is distributed with
annotations for sentence breaks, tokenization, and
part of speech information automatically generated
by the GATE toolkit (Cunningham et al., 2002).8
For parsing we use the Collins (1999) parser.9 For
partial parses, we employ CASS (Abney, 1997). Fi-
nally, we use a simple finite-state recognizer to iden-
tify (possibly nested) quoted phrases.
For classifier construction, we use the IND pack-
age (Buntine, 1993) to train decision trees (we use
the mml tree style, a minimum message length cri-
terion with Bayesian smoothing).
4 Data Description
The data for these experiments come from version
1.1 of the NRRC corpus (Wiebe et al., 2002).10. The
corpus consists of 535 newswire documents (mostly
from the FBIS), of which we used 66 (1375 sen-
tences) for developing the heuristics and features,
while keeping the remaining 469 (9808 sentences)
blind (used for 10-fold cross-validation).
Although the NRRC corpus provides annotations
for all pses, it does not provide annotations to de-
note directly their hierarchical structure within a
8
GATEs sentences sometimes extend across paragraph
boundaries, which seems never to be warranted. Inaccurately
joining sentences has the effect of adding more noise to our
problem, so we split GATEs sentences at paragraph bound-
aries, and introduce writer pses for the newly created sen-
tences.
9
We convert the parse to a dependency format that makes
some of our features simpler using a method similar to the one
described in Xia and Palmer (2001). We also employ a method
from Adam Lopez at the University of Maryland to find gram-
matical relationships between words (subject, object, etc.).
10
The original corpus is available at http:
//nrrc.mitre.org/NRRC/Docs_Data/MPQA_
04/approval_mpqa.htm. Code and data used in our
experiments are available at http://www.cs.cornell.
edu/ ebreck/breck04playing/.
sentence. This structure must be extracted from
an attribute of each pse annotation, which lists the
pses direct and indirect sources. For example, the
source chain for unhappy in sentence 1, would
be (writer, Alice, Bob). The source chains allow
us to automatically recover the hierarchical struc-
ture of the pses: the parent of a pse with source
chain (s0, s1, . . . sn1, sn) is the pse with source
chain (s0, s1, . . . sn1). Unfortunately, ambiguities
can arise. Consider the following sentence:
6. Bob said, youre welcome because he was glad
to see that Mary was happy.
Both said and was glad have the source chain
(writer, Bob),11 while was happy has the source
chain (writer, Bob, Mary). It is therefore not clear
from the manual annotations whether was happy
should have was glad or said as its parent.
5.82% of the pses have ambiguous parentage (i.e.
the recovery step finds a set of parents P(pse) with
|P(pse)| > 1). For training, we assign a class value
of 1 to all instances hpse, pari, par  P(pse). For
testing, if an algorithm attaches pse to any element
of P(pse), we score the link as correct (see Sec-
tion 5.1). Since ultimately our goal is to find the
sources through which information is filtered (rather
than the pses), we believe this is justified.
For training and testing, we used only those sen-
tences that contain at least two non-writer pses12
 for all other sentences, there is only one way to
construct the hierarchical structure. Again, Table 2
presents a breakdown (for the test set) of the num-
ber of pses per sentence  thus we only use approx-
imately one-third of all the sentences in the corpus.
5 Results and Discussion
5.1 Evaluation
How do we evaluate the performance of an au-
tomatic method of determining the hierarchical
structure of pses? Lin (1995) proposes a method
for evaluating dependency parses: the score for
a sentence is the fraction of correct parent links
identified; the score for the corpus is the aver-
age sentence score. Formally, the score for a
11
The annotators also performed coreference resolution on
sources.
12
Under certain circumstances, such as paragraph-long
quotes, the writer of a sentence will not be the same as the
writer of a document. In such sentences, the NRRC corpus con-
tains additional pses for any other sources besides the writer of
the document. Since we are concerned in this work only with
one sentence at a time, we discard all such implicit pses be-
sides the writer of the sentence. Also, in a few cases, more than
one pse in a sentence was marked as having the writer as its
source. We believe this to be an error and so discarded all but
one writer pse.
\x0cmetric size heurOne heurTwo decTree
Lin 2940 65.57% 71.64% 78.30%
perf 2940 36.02% 45.37% 54.52%
bin 21933 73.20% 77.73% 82.12%
bin + 7882 60.63% 66.94% 70.35%
bin  14051 80.24% 83.78% 88.72%
Table 3: Performance on test data. Lin is Lins depen-
dency score, perf is the fraction of sentences whose
structure was identified perfectly, and bin is the perfor-
mance of the binary classifier (broken down for positive
and negative instances). Size is the number of sen-
tences or pse pairs.
# pses # sents heurOne heurTwo decTree
3 1810 70.88% 75.41% 81.82%
4 778 59.17% 67.82% 74.38%
5 239 53.87% 61.92% 68.93%
>5 113 49.31% 58.03% 68.68%
Table 4: Performance by number of pses per sentence
method evaluated on the entire corpus (Lin) is
P
sS
|{pse|pseNon writer pse0s(s)parent(pse)=autopar(pse))}|
|Non writer pse0s(s)|
|S| ,
where S is the set of all sentences in the corpus,
Non writer pse0s(s) is the set of non-writer pses
in sentence s, parent(pse) is the correct parent
of pse, and autopar(pse) is the automatically
identified parent of pse.
We also present results using two other (related)
metrics. The perf metric measures the fraction
of sentences whose structure is determined entirely
correctly (i.e. perfectly). Bin is the accuracy of
the binary classifier (with a 0.5 threshold) on the in-
stances created from the test corpus. We also report
the performance on positive and negative instances.
5.2 Results
We compare the learning-based approach (decTree)
to the heuristic-based approaches introduced in Sec-
tion 3  heurOne assumes that all pses are at-
tached to the writers implicit pse; heurTwo is the
parse-based heuristic that relies solely on the domi-
nance relation13.
We use 10-fold cross-validation on the evalua-
tion data to generate training and test data (although
the heuristics, of course, do not require training).
The results of the decision tree method and the two
heuristics are presented in Table 3.
13
That is, heurTwo attaches a pse to the pse most immedi-
ately dominating it in the dependency tree. If no other pse
dominates it, a pse is attached to the writers pse.
5.3 Discussion
Encouragingly, our machine learning method uni-
formly and significantly14 outperforms the two
heuristic methods, on all metrics and in sentences
with any number of pses. The difference is most
striking in the perf metric, which is perhaps
the most intuitive. Also, the syntax-based heuris-
tic (heurTwo) significantly15 outperforms heurOne,
confirming our intuitions that syntax is important in
this task.
As the binary classifer sees many more negative
instances than positive, it is unsurprising that its per-
formance is much better on negative instances. This
suggests that we might benefit from machine learn-
ing methods for dealing with unbalanced datasets.
Examining the errors of the machine learning sys-
tem on the development set, we see that for half
of the pses with erroneously identified parents, the
parent is either the writers pse, or a pse like said
in sentences 4 and 5 having scope over the entire
sentence. For example,
7. Our concern is whether persons used to the role
of policy implementors can objectively assess and
critique executive policies which impinge on hu-
man rights, said Ramdas.
Our model chose the parent of assess and critique
to be said rather than concern. We also see from
Table 4 that the model performs more poorly on sen-
tences with more pses. We believe that this reflects
a weakness in our decision to combine binary deci-
sions, because the model has learned that in general,
a said or writers pse (near the root of the struc-
ture) is likely to be the parent, while it sees many
fewer examples of pses such as concern that lie
in the middle of the tree.
Although we have ignored the distinction
throughout this paper, error analysis suggests
speech event pses behave differently than private
state pses with respect to how closely syntax re-
flects their hierarchical structure. It may behoove
us to add features to allow the model to take this
into account. Other sources of error include er-
roneous sentence boundary detection, parenthetical
statements (which the parser does not treat correctly
for our purposes) and other parse errors, partial quo-
tations, as well as some errors in the annotation.
Examining the learned trees is difficult because
of their size, but looking at one tree to depth three
14
p < 0.01, using an approximate randomization test with
9,999 trials. See (Eisner, 1996, page 17) and (Chinchor et al.,
1993, pages 430-433) for descriptions of this method.
15
Using the same test as above, p < 0.01, except for the
performance on sentences with more than 5 pses, because of
the small amount of data, where p < 0.02.
\x0creveals a fairly intuitive model. Ignoring the prob-
abilities, the tree decides pseparent is the parent
of psetarget if and only if pseparent is the writers
pse (and psetarget is not in quotation marks), or
if pseparent is the word said. For all the trees
learned, the root feature was either the writer pse
test or the partial-parse-based domination feature.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
We have presented the concept of perspective and
speech expressions, and argued that determining
their hierarchical structure is important for natural
language understanding of perspective. We have
shown that identifying the hierarchical structure of
pses is amenable to automated analysis via a ma-
chine learning approach, although there is room for
improvement in the results.
In the future, we plan to address the related tasks
discussed in Section 2, especially identifying pses
and their immediate sources. We are also interested
in ways of improving the machine learning formu-
lation of the current task, such as optimizing the
binary classifier on the whole-sentence evaluation,
or defining a different binary task that is easier to
learn. Nevertheless, we believe that our results pro-
vide a step towards the development of natural lan-
guage systems that can extract and summarize the
viewpoints and perspectives expressed in text while
taking into account the multi-stage information fil-
tering process that can mislead more nave systems.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by NSF Grant IIS-
0208028 and by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship.
We thank Rebecca Hwa for creating the dependency
parses. We also thank the Cornell NLP group for help-
ful suggestions on drafts of this paper. Finally, we thank
Janyce Wiebe and Theresa Wilson for draft suggestions
and advice regarding this problem and the NRRC corpus.
References
Steven Abney. 1997. The SCOL manual. cass is avail-
able from http://www.vinartus.net/spa/scol1h.tar.gz.
Sabine Bergler. 1993. Semantic dimensions in the field
of reporting verbs. In Proceedings of the Ninth An-
nual Conference of the University of Waterloo Centre
for the New Oxford English Dictionary and Text Re-
search, Oxford, England, September.
Steven Bethard, Hong Yu, Ashley Thornton, Vasileios
Hatzivassiloglou, and Dan Jurafsky. 2004. Automatic
extraction of opinion propositions and their holders.
In Working Notes of the AAAI Spring Symposium on
Exploring Attitude and Affect in Text: Theories and
Applications. March 22-24, 2004, Stanford.
Wray Buntine. 1993. Learning classification trees. In
D. J. Hand, editor, Artificial Intelligence frontiers in
statistics, pages 182201. Chapman & Hall,London.
Available at http://ic.arc.nasa.gov/projects/bayes-
group/ind/IND-program.html.
Nancy Chinchor, Lynette Hirschman, and David Lewis.
1993. Evaluating message understanding systems:
An analysis of the third message understanding
conference (MUC-3). Computational Linguistics,
19(3):409450.
Michael John Collins. 1999. Head-driven Statistical
Models for Natural Language Parsing. Ph.D. thesis,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Hamish Cunningham, Diana Maynard, Kalina Bont-
cheva, and Valentin Tablan. 2002. GATE: A frame-
work and graphical development environment for ro-
bust nlp tools and applications. In Proceedings of the
40th Anniversary Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics (ACL 02), Philadelphia, July.
2003. Proceedings of the Workshop on Text Summariza-
tion, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, May. Presented at
the 2003 Human Language Technology Conference.
Jason Eisner. 1996. An empirical comparison of proba-
bility models for dependency grammar. Technical Re-
port IRCS-96-11, IRCS, University of Pennsylvania.
Christine Gerard. 2000. Modelling readers of news ar-
ticles using nested beliefs. Masters thesis, Concordia
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Daniel Gildea and Daniel Jurafsky. 2002. Automatic la-
beling of semantic roles. Computational Linguistics,
28(3):245288.
Dekang Lin. 1995. A dependency-based method for
evaluating broad-coverage parsers. In IJCAI, pages
14201427.
1998. Proceedings of the Seventh Message Understand-
ing Conference (MUC-7). Morgan Kaufman, April.
NIST. 2003. Proceedings of The Twelfth Text REtrieval
Conference (TREC 2003), Gaithersburg, MD, Novem-
ber. NIST special publication SP 500-255.
Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoffrey Leech,
and Jan Svartvik. 1985. A Comprehensive Grammar
of the English Language. Longman, New York.
J. Wiebe, E. Breck, C. Buckley, C. Cardie, P. Davis,
B. Fraser, D. Litman, D. Pierce, E. Riloff, and T. Wil-
son. 2002. NRRC Summer Workshop on Multiple-
Perspective Question Answering Final Report. Tech
report, NRRC, Bedford, MA.
J. Wiebe, E. Breck, C. Buckley, C. Cardie, P. Davis,
B. Fraser, D. Litman, D. Pierce, E. Riloff, T. Wilson,
D. Day, and M. Maybury. 2003. Recognizing and Or-
ganizing Opinions Expressed in the World Press. In
Papers from the AAAI Spring Symposium on New Di-
rections in Question Answering (AAAI tech report SS-
03-07). March 24-26, 2003. Stanford.
Janyce Wiebe. 1994. Tracking point of view in narrative.
Computational Linguistics, 20(2):233287.
Janyce Wiebe. 2002. Instructions for annotating opin-
ions in newspaper articles. Technical Report TR-02-
101, Dept. of Comp. Sci., University of Pittsburgh.
Fei Xia and Martha Palmer. 2001. Converting depen-
dency structures to phrase structures. In Proc. of the
HLT Conference.
\x0c'